UMAP The
                                                              Journal
Publisher                      Vol. 22, No. 3
COMAP, Inc.
                               Editor
Executive Publisher
Solomon A. Garfunkel           Paul J. Campbell
                               Campus Box 194
ILAP Editor                    Beloit College
David C. "Chris" Arney         700 College St.
Dean of the School of          Beloit, WI 53511≠5595
                               campbell@beloit.edu
     Mathematics and Sciences
The College of Saint Rose      Associate Editors           Brigham Young University
432 Western Avenue                                         The College of St. Rose
Albany, NY 12203               Don Adolphson               University of Houston--Downtown
arneyc@mail.strose.edu         David C. "Chris" Arney      Harvey Mudd College
                               Ron Barnes                  Troy State University Montgomery
On Jargon Editor               Arthur Benjamin             University of Wisconsin--Madison
Yves Nievergelt                James M. Cargal             Harvey Mudd College
Department of Mathematics      Murray K. Clayton           University of Minnesota, Duluth
Eastern Washington University  Courtney S. Coleman         Gettysburg College
Cheney, WA 99004               Linda L. Deneen             COMAP, Inc.
ynievergelt@ewu.edu            James P. Fink               California State University, Fullerton
                               Solomon A. Garfunkel        Brigham Young University
Reviews Editor                 William B. Gearhart         Southern Methodist University
James M. Cargal                William C. Giauque          Metropolitan State College
P.O. Box 210667                Richard Haberman            Adelphi University
Montgomery, AL 36121≠0667      Charles E. Lienert          Eastern Washington University
JMCargal@sprintmail.com        Walter Meyer                Georgia College and State University
                               Yves Nievergelt             Lawrence Livermore Laboratory
Development Director           John S. Robertson           Lehigh Carbon Community College
Laurie W. Arago¥ n             Garry H. Rodrigue           Beloit College
                               Ned W. Schillow             St. Mark's School, Dallas
Production Manager             Philip D. Strafﬁn           Comm. College of Allegheny County
George W. Ward                 J.T. Sutcliffe              Colorado State University
                               Donna M. Szott              Indiana University
Project Manager                Gerald D. Taylor            University of Illinois
Roland Cheyney                 Maynard Thompson            Colorado School of Mines
                               Ken Travers
Copy Editors                   Robert E.D. "Gene" Woolsey
Seth A. Maislin
Pauline Wright

Distribution Manager
Kevin Darcy

Production Secretary
Gail Wessell

Graphic Designer
Daiva Kiliulis
Subscription Rates for 2001 Calendar Year: Volume 22

                      MEMBERSHIP PLUS FOR INDIVIDUAL SUBSCRIBERS

Individuals subscribe to The UMAP Journal through COMAP's Membership Plus. This subscription

includes print copies of quarterly issues of The UMAP Journal, our annual collection UMAP Modules:

Tools for Teaching, our organizational newsletter Consortium, on-line membership that allows

members to search our on-line catalog, download COMAP print materials, and reproduce for use in

their classes, and a 10% discount on all COMAP materials.

(Domestic)            #2120 $75

(Outside U.S.)        #2121 $85

                      INSTITUTIONAL PLUS MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIBERS

Institutions can subscribe to the Journal through either Institutional Pus Membership, Regular

Institutional Membership, or a Library Subscription. Institutional Plus Members receive two print

copies of each of the quarterly issues of The UMAP Journal, our annual collection UMAP Modules:
Tools for Teaching, our organizational newsletter Consortium, on-line membership that allows

members to search our on-line catalog, download COMAP print materials, and reproduce for use in

any class taught in the institution, and a 10% discount on all COMAP materials.

(Domestic)            #2170 $395

(Outside U.S.)        #2171 $415

                      INSTITUTIONAL MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIBERS

Regular Institutional members receive only print copies of The UMAP Journal, our annual collection

UMAP Modules: Tools for Teaching, our organizational newsletter Consortium, and a 10% discount on

all COMAP materials.

(Domestic)            #2140 $165

(Outside U.S.)        #2141 $185

                      LIBRARY SUBSCRIPTIONS

The Library Subscription includes quarterly issues of The UMAP Journal and our annual collection
UMAP Modules: Tools for Teaching and our organizational newsletter Consortium.

(Domestic)            #2130 $140
(Outside U.S.)        #2131 $160

To order, send a check or money order to COMAP, or call toll-free

                          1-800-77-COMAP (1-800-772-6627).

The UMAP Journal is published quarterly by the Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications
(COMAP), Inc., Suite 210, 57 Bedford Street, Lexington, MA, 02420, in cooperation with the
American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC), the Mathematical
Association of America (MAA), the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), the
American Statistical Association (ASA), the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM),
and The Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS). The Journal
acquaints readers with a wide variety of professional applications of the mathematical sciences and
provides a forum for the discussion of new directions in mathematical education (ISSN 0197-3622).

                               Second-class postage paid at Boston, MA
                                    and at additional mailing offices.
                                         Send address changes to:
                                             The UMAP Journal
                                                 COMAP, Inc.

                         57 Bedford Street, Suite 210, Lexington, MA 02420
                      © Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Vol. 22, No. 3 2001

Table of Contents

Publisher's Editorial

The Face of Things to Come
     Solomon A. Garfunkel ..................................................................................185

Modeling Forum

Results of the 2001 Contest in Mathematical Modeling ....................187
     Frank Giordano

Spokes or Discs?
     W.D.V. De Wet, D.F. Malan, and C. Mumbeck ................................211

Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type
     Nicholas J. Howard, Zachariah R. Miller,
     and Matthew R. Adams .................................................................................225

A Systematic Technique for Optimal Bicycle Wheel Selection
     Michael B. Flynn, Eamonn T. Long, and
     William Whelan-Curtin ................................................................................241

Author-Judge's Commentary: The Outstanding Bicycle Wheel
     Papers
     Kelly Black ...........................................................................................................253

Project H.E.R.O.: Hurricane Emergency Route Optimization
     Nathan Gossett, Barbara Hess, and Michael Page.........................257

Traffic Flow Models and the Evacuation Problem
     Samuel W. Malone, Carl A. Miller, and Daniel B. Neill................271

The Crowd Before the Storm
     Jonathan David Charlesworth, Finale Pankaj Doshi,
     and Joseph Edgar Gonzalez.........................................................................291

Jammin' with Floyd: A Traffic Flow Analysis of South Carolina
     Hurricane Evacuation
     Christopher Hanusa, Ari Nieh, and Matthew Schnaider ...........301

Blowin in the Wind
.........Mark Wagner, Kenneth Kopp, and William E. Kolasa ..........311
Please Move Quickly and Quietly to the Nearest Freeway

     Corey R. Houmand, Andrew D. Pruett, and Adam S. Dickey ...323
Judge's Commentary:

     The Outstanding Hurricane Evacuation Papers
     Mark Parker..........................................................................................................337
                                                                     Publisher's Editorial 185

Publisher's Editorial

The Face of Things to Come

Solomon A. Garfunkel

Executive Director
COMAP, Inc.
57 Bedford St., Suite 210
Lexington, MA 02420
s.garfunkel@mail.comap.com

    Typically, I use this space to write once a year about the new activities at
COMAP. And this has been an amazing year. We have sent three new under-
graduate books to be published, all of which followed from work we had done
on major NSF projects. Brooks/Cole has published Mathematics Methods and
Modeling for Today's Mathematics Classroom: A Contemporary Approach to Teaching
Grades 7-12, by John Dossey, Frank Giordano, and others (ISBN 0≠534≠36604≠X).
This book, designed for use in preservice programs for high school teachers,
is a direct result of a Division of Undergraduate Education grant from NSF.
The idea behind this grant was to help prepare future high school teachers,
both in content and in pedagogy, for the changes in curricula, technology, and
assessment that have followed the implementation of the NCTM Standards.

    In addition, W.H. Freeman has published two new COMAP texts: Precal-
culus: Modeling Our World (ISBN 0≠7167≠4359≠0) and College Algebra: Modeling
Our World (ISBN 0≠7167≠4457≠0). Based on our secondary series, Mathematics:
Modeling Our World (M:MOW), these texts represent activity-based, modeling-
driven approaches to entry-level collegiate mathematics. We hope that they
will set a new standard for these courses.

    And speaking of new standards, we are also in the process of completing the
sixth edition of For All Practical Purposes. In this new edition, we greatly expand
our coverage of election/voting theory, not surprisingly taking advantage of
the data and interest surrounding the 2000 presidential race. We are also adding
a section on the human genome, reinforcing the fact that new and important
applications of mathematics are being discovered every day.

    But perhaps this year's most important accomplishments are the ideas we
have generated and the proposals that we have written. I have often joked that
I would like to found two new journals: the Journal of Funded Proposals and the

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 185≠186. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
186 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Journal of Unfunded Proposals, if for no better reason than at least I would have
a great many more publications. As I write this editorial, I do not know into
which category our three new NSF proposals will fall, but I would like to share
their contents with you. It is my fondest hope that these will represent the face
of COMAP to come.

    The ﬁrst proposal is to revise M:MOW. Our four-year comprehensive re-
form secondary school series was ﬁrst published in 1998. In the years since
publication, we have learned a great deal from early adopters about ways to
help them customize the texts to meet local needs, including new standard-
ized tests. It is time to produce a second edition, which we hope will have
widespread appeal.

    The second proposal is to produce a new liberal arts calculus text with ac-
companying video and web support. COMAP has not undertaken a major
video project in some time and we feel that a series of videos visually demon-
strating the importance and applicability of the calculus is a natural extension
of our previous efforts. Moreover, we will (if funded) prepare shorter video
segments for ease of use on the Web.

    The last proposal extends the idea of making materials available on the Web
one step further with an ambitious program to produce a series of Web-based
courses for present and future teachers, K-12. Again, we plan to make extensive
use of new video as well as the interactivity of the Web. Here we hope to use
master teachers, with expertise in both content and methods, and use the power
of the Internet to reach classrooms and teachers all across the country.

    I do not know whether at this time next year we will be working on all of
these projects. But I do know that we will continue our efforts to create new
materials and support all of you, who make reform of mathematics education
possible.

About the Author

    Sol Garfunkel received his Ph.D. in mathematical logic from the University
of Wisconsin in 1967. He was at Cornell University and at the University of
Connecticut at Storrs for eleven years and has dedicated the last 20 years to
research and development efforts in mathematics education. He has been the
Executive Director of COMAP since its inception in 1980.

    He has directed a wide variety of projects, including UMAP (Undergradu-
ate Mathematics and Its Applications Project), which led to the founding of this
Journal, and HiMAP (High School Mathematics and Its Applications Project),
both funded by the NSF. For Annenberg/CPB, he directed three telecourse
projects: For All Practical Purposes (in which he also appeared as the on-camera
host), Against All Odds: Inside Statistics, and In Simplest Terms: College Alge-
bra. He is currently co-director of the Applications Reform in Secondary Edu-
cation (ARISE) project, a comprehensive curriculum development project for
secondary school mathematics.
                                                               Results of the 2001 MCM 187

Modeling Forum

Results of the 2001
Mathematical Contest in Modeling

Frank Giordano, MCM Director

COMAP, Inc.
57 Bedford St., Suite 210
Lexington, MA 02420
f.giordano@mail.comap.com

Introduction

    A total of 496 teams of undergraduates, from 238 institutions in 11 coun-
tries, spent the second weekend in February working on applied mathematics
problems in the 17th Mathematical Contest in Modeling (MCM) and in the 3rd
Interdisciplinary Contest in Modeling (ICM). This issue of The UMAP Journal
reports on the MCM contest; results and Outstanding papers from the ICM
contest will appear in the next issue, Vol. 22, No. 4.

    The 2001 MCM began at 12:01 a.m. on Friday, Feb. 9 and ofﬁcially ended
at 11:59 p.m. on Monday, Feb. 12. During that time, teams of up to three
undergraduates were to research and submit an optimal solution for one of
two open-ended modeling problems. The 2001 MCM marked the inaugural
year for the new online contest, and it was a great success. Students were able
to register, obtain contest materials, download the problems at the appropriate
time, and enter data through COMAP'S MCM website.

    Each team had to choose one of the two contest problems. After a weekend
of hard work, solution papers were sent to COMAP on Monday. Nine of the
top papers appear in this issue of The UMAP Journal.

    Results and winning papers from the ﬁrst sixteen contests were published
in special issues of Mathematical Modeling (1985≠1987) and The UMAP Journal
(1985≠2000). The 1994 volume of Tools for Teaching, commemorating the tenth
anniversary of the contest, contains all of the 20 problems used in the ﬁrst ten
years of the contest and a winning paper for each. Limited quantities of that

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 187≠210. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
188 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

volume and of the special MCM issues of the Journal for the last few years are
available from COMAP.

    This year's Problem A was about bicycle wheels and what edge they may
give to a race. Before any contest, professional cyclists make educated guesses
about which one of two basic types of wheels to choose for any given competi-
tion. The team's Sports Director has asked them to come up with a better system
to help determine which kind of wheel--wire spoke or solid disk--should be
used for any given race course.

    Problem B addressed the evacuation of Charleston, South Carolina during
1999's Hurricane Floyd. Maps, population data, and other speciﬁc details were
given to the teams. They were tasked with constructing a model to investigate
potential strategies. In addition, they were asked to submit a news article that
would be used to explain their plan to the public.

Problem A: The Bicycle Wheel Problem

Introduction

    Cyclists have different types of wheels they can use on their bicycles. The
two basic types of wheels are those constructed using wire spokes and those
constructed of a solid disk (see Figure 1). The spoked wheels are lighter but
the solid wheels are more aerodynamic. A solid wheel is never used on the
front for a road race but can be used on the rear of the bike.

                             Figure 1. Solid wheel (left) and spoked wheel (right).

    Professional cyclists look at a racecourse and make an educated guess as
to what kind of wheels should be used. The decision is based on the number
and steepness of the hills, the weather, wind speed, the competition, and other
considerations.

    The directeur sportif of your favorite team would like to have a better system
in place and has asked your team for information to help determine what kind
of wheel should be used for a given course.
                                                               Results of the 2001 MCM 189

    The directeur sportif needs speciﬁc information to help make a decision and
has asked your team to accomplish the tasks listed below. For each of the tasks,
assume that the same spoked wheel will always be used on the front but that
there is a choice of wheels for the rear.

Task 1

    Provide a table giving the wind speed at which the power required for a solid
rear wheel is less than for a spoked rear wheel. The table should include the
wind speeds for different road grades starting from 0% to 10% in 1% increments.
(Road grade is deﬁned to be the ratio of the total rise of a hill divided by the
length of the road.1) A rider starts at the bottom of the hill at a speed of 45 kph
and the deceleration of the rider is proportional to the road grade. A rider will
lose about 8 kph for a 5% grade over 100 m.

Task 2

    Provide an example of how the table could be used for a speciﬁc time trial
course.

Task 3

    Determine if the table is an adequate means for deciding on the wheel
conﬁguration and offer other suggestions as to how to make this decision.

Problem B: The Hurricane Evacuation
Problem

    Evacuating the coast of South Carolina ahead of the predicted landfall of
Hurricane Floyd in 1999 led to a monumental trafﬁc jam. Trafﬁc slowed to
a standstill on Interstate I-26, which is the principal route going inland from
Charleston to the relatively safe haven of Columbia in the center of the state.
What is normally an easy two-hour drive took up to 18 hours to complete. Many
cars simply ran out of gas along the way. Fortunately, Floyd turned north and
spared the state this time, but the public outcry is forcing state ofﬁcials to ﬁnd
ways to avoid a repeat of this trafﬁc nightmare.

    The principal proposal put forth to deal with this problem is the reversal
of trafﬁc on I-26, so that both sides, including the coastal-bound lanes, have
trafﬁc headed inland from Charleston to Columbia. Plans to carry this out
have been prepared (and posted on the Web) by the South Carolina Emergency

    1If the hill is viewed as a triangle, the grade is the sine of the angle at the bottom of the hill.
190 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
Preparedness Division. Trafﬁc reversal on principal roads leading inland from
Myrtle Beach and Hilton Head is also planned.

    A simpliﬁed map of South Carolina is shown in Figure 2. Charleston has
approximately 500,000 people, Myrtle Beach has about 200,000 people, and
another 250,000 people are spread out along the rest of the coastal strip. (More
accurate data, if sought, are widely available.)

                                       Figure 2. Highways in South Carolina.

    The interstates have two lanes of trafﬁc in each direction except in the
metropolitan areas, where they have three. Columbia, another metro area of
around 500,000 people, does not have sufﬁcient hotel space to accommodate
the evacuees (including some coming from farther north by other routes); so
some trafﬁc continues outbound on I-26 towards Spartanburg, on I-77 north to
Charlotte, and on I-20 east to Atlanta. In 1999, trafﬁc leaving Columbia going
northwest was moving only very slowly.

    Construct a model for the problem to investigate what strategies may re-
duce the congestion observed in 1999. Here are the questions that need to be
addressed:
                                                               Results of the 2001 MCM 191

1. Under what conditions does the plan for turning the two coastal-bound
   lanes of I-26 into two lanes of Columbia-bound trafﬁc, essentially turning
   the entire I-26 into one-way trafﬁc, signiﬁcantly improve evacuation trafﬁc
   ﬂow?

2. In 1999, the simultaneous evacuation of the state's entire coastal region was
   ordered. Would the evacuation trafﬁc ﬂow improve under an alternative
   strategy that staggers the evacuation, perhaps county by county over some
   time period consistent with the pattern of how hurricanes affect the coast?

3. Several smaller highways besides I-26 extend inland from the coast. Under
   what conditions would it improve evacuation ﬂow to turn around trafﬁc on
   these?

4. What effect would it have on evacuation ﬂow to establish additional tempo-
   rary shelters in Columbia, to reduce the trafﬁc leaving Columbia?

5. In 1999, many families leaving the coast brought along their boats, campers,
   and motor homes. Many drove all of their cars. Under what conditions
   should there be restrictions on vehicle types or numbers of vehicles brought
   in order to guarantee timely evacuation?

6. It has been suggested that in 1999 some of the coastal residents of Georgia
   and Florida, who were ﬂeeing the earlier predicted landfalls of Hurricane
   Floyd to the south, came up I-95 and compounded the trafﬁc problems. How
   big an impact can they have on the evacuation trafﬁc ﬂow?

    Clearly identify what measures of performance are used to compare strate-
gies.

    Required: Prepare a short newspaper article, not to exceed two pages, ex-
plaining the results and conclusions of your study to the public.

The Results

    The solution papers were coded at COMAP headquarters so that names and
afﬁliations of the authors would be unknown to the judges. Each paper was
then read preliminarily by two "triage" judges at Southern Connecticut State
University (Problem A) or at the National Security Agency (Problem B). At the
triage stage, the summary and overall organization are the basis for judging a
paper. If the judges' scores diverged for a paper, the judges conferred; if they
still did not agree on a score, a third judge evaluated the paper.

    Final judging took place at Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, California.
The judges classiﬁed the papers as follows:

    The nine papers that the judges designated as Outstanding appear in this
special issue of The UMAP Journal, together with commentaries. We list those
teams and the Meritorious teams (and advisors) below; the list of all partici-
pating schools, advisors, and results is in the Appendix.
192 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Bicycle Wheel         Outstanding  Meritorious  Honorable   Successful    Total
Hurricane Evacuation          3          27      Mention   Participation   215
                              6          43                                281
                              9          70           58         127       496
                                                      65         167
                                                     123         294

                         Outstanding Teams

Institution and Advisor                           Team Members

                            Bicycle Wheel Papers

"Spokes or Discs?"                                W.D.V. De Wet
Stellenbosch University                           D.F. Maian
Matieland, South Africa                           C. Mumbeck
Jan H. van Vuuren

"Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type"               Nicholas J. Howard
United States Military Academy                    Zachariah R. Miller
West Point, NY                                    Matthew R. Adams
Donovan D. Phillips

"A Systematic Technique for Optimal               Michael Flynn
   Bicycle Wheel Selection"                       Eamonn Long
                                                  William Whelan-Curtin
University College Cork
Cork, Ireland
James Jo Grannell

                      Hurricane Evacuation Papers

"Project H.E.R.O.:                                Nathan M. Gossett
   Hurricane Evacuation Route Optimization"       Barbara A. Hess
                                                  Michael S. Page
Bethel College
St. Paul, MN
William M. Kinney

"Trafﬁc Flow Models and                           Samuel W. Malone
   the Evacuation Problem"                        Carl A. Miller
                                                  Daniel B. Neill
Duke University
Durham, NC
David P. Kraines
                                             Results of the 2001 MCM 193

"The Crowd Before the Storm"                 Jonathan D. Charlesworth
The Governor's School                        Finale P. Doshi
Richmond, VA                                 Joseph E. Gonzalez
John A. Barnes

"Jammin' with Floyd: A Trafﬁc Flow Analysis  Christopher Hanusa
   of South Carolina Hurricane Evacuation"   Ari Nie
                                             Matthew Schnaider
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA
Ran Libeskind-Hadas

"Blowin' in the Wind"                        Mark Wagner
Lawrence Technological University            Kenneth Kopp
Southﬁeld, MI                                William E. Kolasa
Ruth G. Favro

"Please Move Quickly and Quietly to the      Corey R. Houmand
   Nearest Freeway"                          Andrew D. Pruett
                                             Adam S. Dickey
Wake Forest University
Winston-Salem, NC
Miaohua Jiang

Meritorious Teams

Bicycle Wheel Papers (27 teams)

Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, P.R. China (Jiang Guangfeng)
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, P.R. China (Wenyan Yuan)
Brandon University, Brandon, Canada (Doug A. Pickering)
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, CA (Thomas O'Neil)
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, P.R. China (Gao Zhenbin)
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, P.R. China (Shang Shouting)
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA (Michael E. Moody)
James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA (James S. Sochacki)
Jilin University of Technology, Changchun, P.R. China (Fang Peichen)
John Carroll University, University Heights, OH (Angela, S. Spalsbury)
Lafayette College, Easton, PA (Thomas Hill)
Lake Superior State University, Sault Sainte Marie, MI (J. Jaroma and D. Baumann)
Lewis and Clark College, Portland, OR (Robert W. Owens)
Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R. China (Chen En-shui)
Tianjin University, Tianjin, P.R. China (Dong Wenjun)
Trinity University, San Antonio, TX (Fred M. Loxsom)
United States Air Force Academy, USAF Academy, CO (Jim West)
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland (Peter Duffy)
University of Western Ontario, London, Canada (Peter H. Poole)
Washington University, St. Louis, MO (Hiro Mukai)
194 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Westminster College, New Wilmington, PA (Barbara T. Faires) (two teams)
Wright State University, Dayton, OH (Thomas P. Svobodny)
Youngstown State University, Youngstown, OH (Thomas Smotzer)
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China (He Yong)
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China (Yang Qifan)
Zhongshan University, Guangzhou, P.R. China (Chen Zepeng)

Hurricane Evacuation Papers (43 teams)

Beijing University of Posts & Telecommunications, Beijing, P.R. China (He Zuguo)
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, CA (Thomas O'Neil)
Central South University, Changsha, P.R. China (Zheng Zhou-shun)
Clarion University, Clarion, PA (Jon A. Beal)
Dong Hua University, Shanghai, China (Ding Yongsheng)
East China University of Science & Technology, ShangHai, P.R. China (Liu Zhaohui)
Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, PA (Sharon L. Stephenson)
Hillsdale College, Hillsdale, MI (Robert J. Hesse)
James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA (Caroline Smith)
Jiading No. 1 High School, Jiading, P.R. China (Wang Yu)
MIT, Cambridge, MA (Dan Rothman)
N.C. School of Science and Mathematics, Durham, NC (Dot Doyle)
National University of Defence Technology, Changsha, P.R. China (Wu Mengda)
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore

       (Lim Leong Chye Andrew)
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC (Jeffrey S. Scroggs)
Northeastern University, Shenyang, P.R. China (Xiao Wendong)
Paciﬁc Lutheran University, Tacoma, WA (Zhu Mei)
P‰ivˆl‰ College, Tarttila, Finland (Merikki Lappi)
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, Terre Haute, IN (David J. Rader)
Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ (Paul J. Laumakis)
Shanghai Foreign Language School, Shanghai, P.R. China (Pan Li Qun)
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, P.R. China (Lin Jianliang)
Southern Oregon University, Ashland, OR (Lisa M. Ciasullo)
U.S. Military Academy, West Point, NY (David Sanders)
U.S. Military Academy, West Point, NY (Edward Connors)
University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK (Chris Hartman)
University of Colorado≠Boulder, Boulder, CO (Bengt Fornberg)
University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA (James Graham-Eagle)
University of North Texas, Denton, TX (John A. Quintanilla)
University of Richmond, Richmond, VA (Kathy W. Hoke)
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, P.R. China (Gu Jiajun)
University of South Carolina Aiken, Aiken, SC (Laurene V. Fausett)
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC (Ralph E. Howard)
University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia (Tony J. Roberts)
University of Washington, Seattle, WA (James Allen Morrow)
Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC (Miaohua Jiang)
                                                               Results of the 2001 MCM 195

Washington University, St. Louis, MO (Hiro Mukai)
Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA (Saim Ural)
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA (Bogdan Vernescu)
Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R. China (Huang Chongchao)
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Juris Steprans)
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China (He Yong)
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China (Yang Qifan)

Awards and Contributions

    Each participating MCM advisor and team member received a certiﬁcate
signed by the Contest Director and the appropriate Head Judge.

    INFORMS, the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sci-
ences, gave a cash prize and a three-year membership to each member of the
teams from Stellenbosch University (Bicycle Wheel Problem) and Lawrence
Technological University (Hurricane Evacuation Problem). Also, INFORMS
gave free one-year memberships to all members of Meritorious and Honorable
Mention teams. The Lawrence Tech team presented its results at the annual
INFORMS meeting in Washington DC in April.

    The Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) designated one
Outstanding team from each problem as a SIAM Winner. The teams were from
U.S. Military Academy (Bicycle Wheel Problem) and Wake Forest University
(Hurricane Evacuation Problem). Each of the team members was awarded a
$300 cash prize and the teams received partial expenses to present their results
at a special Minisymposium of the SIAM Annual Meeting in San Diego CA in
July. Their schools were given a framed, hand-lettered certiﬁcate in gold leaf.

    The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) designated one Outstand-
ing team from each problem as an MAA Winner. The teams were from Univer-
sity College Cork (Bicycle Wheel Problem) and Wake Forest University (Hur-
ricane Evacuation Problem). With partial travel support from the MAA, both
teams presented their solutions at a special session of the MAA Mathfest in
Madison WI in August. Each team member was presented a certiﬁcate by
MAA President Ann Watkins.

Judging

Director
Frank R. Giordano, COMAP, Lexington, MA

Associate Directors
Robert L. Borrelli, Mathematics Dept., Harvey Mudd College,

    Claremont, CA
196 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Patrick Driscoll, Dept. of Mathematical Sciences, U.S. Military Academy,
    West Point, NY

William Fox, Mathematics Dept., Francis Marion University, Florence, SC
Michael Moody, Mathematics Dept., Harvey Mudd College,

    Claremont, CA

Bicycle Wheel Problem

Head Judge
Marvin S. Keener, Executive Vice-President, Oklahoma State University,

    Stillwater, OK

Associate Judges
Ronald Barnes, University of Houston Downtown, Houston TX (MAA)
Kelly Black, Mathematics Dept., University of New Hampshire,

    Durham, NH (SIAM)
David Elliott, Institute for System Research, University of Maryland,

    College Park, MD (SIAM)
Ben Fusaro, Mathematics Dept., Florida State University,

    Tallahassee, FL
Mario Juncosa, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA
John Kobza, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX (INFORMS)
Dan Solow, Mathematics Dept., Case Western Reserve University,

    Cleveland, OH (INFORMS)

Hurricane Evacuation Problem

Head Judge
Maynard Thompson, Mathematics Dept., University of Indiana,

    Bloomington, IN

Associate Judges
Paul Boisen, National Security Agency, Ft. Meade, MD (Triage)
James Case, Baltimore, Maryland
Courtney Coleman, Mathematics Dept., Harvey Mudd College,

    Claremont, CA
Lisette De Pillis, Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA
William Fox, Dept. of Mathematical Sciences, U.S. Military Academy,

    West Point, NY
Jerry Griggs, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
Jeff Hartzler, Mathematics Dept., Pennsylvania State University Middletown,

    Middletown, PA (MAA)
Deborah Levinson, Compaq Computer Corp., Colorado Springs, CO
Veena Mendiratta, Lucent Technologies, Naperville, IL
Don Miller, Dept. of Mathematics, St. Mary's College, Notre Dame, IN (SIAM)
Mark R. Parker, Mathematics Dept., Carroll College, Helena, MT (SIAM)
                                                               Results of the 2001 MCM 197

John L. Scharf, Carroll College, Helena, MT
Lee Seitelman, Glastonbury, CT (SIAM)
Kathleen M. Shannon, Salisbury State University, Salisbury, MD
Michael Tortorella, Lucent Technologies, Holmdel, NJ
Marie Vanisko, Carroll College, Helena, MT
Cynthia J. Wyels, Dept. of Mathematics, Physics, and Computer Science,

    California Lutheran University, Thousand Oaks, CA

Triage Sessions:

Bicycle Wheel Problem

Head Triage Judge
Theresa M. Sandifer, Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, CT

Associate Judges
Therese L. Bennett, Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, CT
Ross B. Gingrich, Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, CT
Cynthia B. Gubitose, Western Connecticut State University, Danbury, CT
Ron Kutz, Western Connecticut State University, Danbury, CT
C. Edward Sandifer, Western Connecticut State University, Danbury, CT

Hurricane Evacuation Problem

Head Triage Judge
Paul Boisen, National Security Agency, Ft. Meade, MD

Associate Judges
James Case, Baltimore, Maryland
Peter Anspach, Jennifer Mcgreevy, Erin Schram, Larry Wargo, and 7 others

    from the National Security Agency

Sources of the Problems

    The Bicycle Wheel Problem was contributed by Kelly Black, Mathematics
Dept., University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH. The Hurricane Evacuation
Problem was contributed by Jerry Griggs, Mathematics Dept., University of
South Carolina, Columbia, SC.

Acknowledgments

    The MCM was funded this year by the National Security Agency, whose
support we deeply appreciate. We thank Dr. Gene Berg of NSA for his coordi-
nating efforts. The MCM is also indebted to INFORMS, SIAM, and the MAA,
which provided judges and prizes.
198 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    I thank the MCM judges and MCM Board members for their valuable and
unﬂagging efforts. Harvey Mudd College, its Mathematics Dept. staff, and
Prof. Borrelli were gracious hosts to the judges.

Cautions

    To the reader of research journals:

    Usually a published paper has been presented to an audience, shown to
colleagues, rewritten, checked by referees, revised, and edited by a journal
editor. Each of the student papers here is the result of undergraduates working
on a problem over a weekend; allowing substantial revision by the authors
could give a false impression of accomplishment. So these papers are essentially
au naturel. Light editing has taken place: minor errors have been corrected,
wording has been altered for clarity or economy, and style has been adjusted to
that of The UMAP Journal. Please peruse these student efforts in that context.

    To the potential MCM Advisor:

    It might be overpowering to encounter such output from a weekend of
work by a small team of undergraduates, but these solution papers are highly
atypical. A team that prepares and participates will have an enriching learning
experience, independent of what any other team does.
                                                       Results of the 2001 MCM 199

Appendix: Successful Participants

KEY:

P = Successful Participation                           A = Bicycle Wheel Control Problem

H = Honorable Mention                                  B = Hurricane Evacuation Problem

M = Meritorious

O = Outstanding (published in this special issue)

INSTITUTION                           CITY             ADVISOR               AB
                                      Montgomery       Robert L. Robertson         P,P
ALABAMA
   Huntingdon College

ALASKA

University of Alaska Fairbanks Fairbanks               Chris Hartman            M

ARIZONA

McClintock High School                Tempe            James S. Gibson       P

CALIFORNIA                            Thousand Oaks    Sandy Lofstock              H,P
   California Lutheran University     San Luis Obispo  Matthew J. Moelter    P
   California Poly. State University                   Thomas O'Neil         MM
                                      Bakersﬁeld       Maureen E. Rush
   California State University        El Cajon         Tibor F. Szarvas            P
   Christian Heritage College         Claremont        Ran Libeskind-Hadas   P
   Harvey Mudd College                                 Michael E. Moody
                                      Los Angeles      Ramin Naimi                 O,H
   Occidental College                 Berkeley         Brian W. Curtin       MH
   University of California
                                                                                   P
                                                                                   P,P

COLORADO

Colorado College                      Colorado Springs Peter L. Staab        HH

Mesa State College                    Grand Junction Edward K. Bonan-Hamada     H,P

Regis University                      Denver           Linda L. Duchrow         P

United States Air Force Academy USAF Academy James S. Rolf                   P

                                                       Jim West              M

University of Colorado                Colorado Springs Gregory J. Morrow     P

                                      Boulder          Bengt Fornberg        HM

University of Southern Colorado Pueblo                 James N. Louisell     H

CONNECTICUT                           Fairﬁeld         Peter Loth                  P
   Sacred Heart University            New Haven        Therese L. Bennett    H
   Southern Conn. State University

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA                  Washington       Andrew J. Vogt        PP
   Georgetown University
200 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                          CITY           ADVISOR              AB

FLORIDA                              Daytona Beach  Greg Scott Spradlin  P,P
   Embry-Riddle Aero. University     Tallahassee    Bruno Guerrieri      PP
   Florida A&M University            DeLand         Lisa O. Coulter
   Stetson University                Jacksonville   Peter A. Braza               P
   University of North Florida                                                   P

GEORGIA                              Decatur        Robert A. Leslie             P,P
   Agnes Scott College               Statesboro     Goran Lesaja                 H,P
   Georgia Southern University       Carrollton     Scott Gordon         P
   State University of West Georgia
                                                                         P
IDAHO                                Caldwell       Mike Hitchman                P
   Albertson College of Idaho        Boise          Jodi L. Mead
   Boise State University                                                        H,P
                                                                         P,P
ILLINOIS                             Greenville     Galen R. Peters      P
   Greenville Colllege               Bloomington    Zahia Drici
   Illinois Wesleyan University      DeKalb         Emil Cornea                  H,P
   Northern Illinois University      Wheaton        Paul Isihara
   Wheaton College                                                               H,H
                                                                         H
INDIANA                              Goshen         David Housman
   Goshen College                    Bloomington    Michael S. Jolly             M,P
   Indiana University                Terre Haute    David J. Rader               H
   Rose-Hulman Inst. of Technology                  Frank Young                  H,P
                                                    Peter D. Smith
Saint Mary's College                 Notre Dame                          PP
                                                                         HH
IOWA                                 Des Moines     Sergio Loch          P,P
   Grand View College                Grinnell       Marc A. Chamberland
   Grinnell College                                 Mark Montgomery              H,P
                                     Decorah        Reginald D. Laursen          H
   Luther College                    Cedar Rapids   K.R. Knopp           PP
   Mt. Mercy College                 Indianola      Murphy Waggoner      H
   Simpson College                                  Werner S. Kolln              P,P
                                     Waverly        Mariah Birgen
   Wartburg College                                                      P
                                                                                 P
KANSAS                               Emporia        Ton Boerkoel
   Emporia State University          Manhattan      Korten N. Auckly     HH
   Kansas State University                                                       P

KENTUCKY                             Wilmore        Kenneth P. Rietz
   Asbury College                    Louisville     Scott W. Bagley
   Spalding University
                                                       Results of the 2001 MCM 201

INSTITUTION                        CITY                ADVISOR                AB
                                                       Richard C. DeVault
LOUISIANA                                                                     P
   Northwestern State University Natchitoches
                                                                                      H
MAINE                              Waterville          Jan Holly
   Colby College                                                              H,P
                                                                                      P
MARYLAND                           Baltimore           Robert E. Lewand               P
   Goucher College                 Baltimore           Daniel Q. Naiman
   Johns Hopkins University        Emmitsburg          William E. O'Toole     P
   Mount Saint Mary's College                          Fred Portier           H
                                                       Steven M. Hetzler
Salisbury State University         Salisbury           Michael J. Bardzell            P

MASSACHUSETTS                      Cambridge           Dan Rothman                    M,H
   MIT                             Salem               Kenny Ching                    P
   Salem State College             Northampton         Ruth Haas                      P
   Smith College                   Lowell              James Graham-Eagle     PM
   University of Massachusetts     Williamstown        Stewart D. Johnson     P
   Williams College                                    Frank Morgan           P
                                                       Cesar E. Silva                 P
Worcester Poly. Inst.              Worcester           Bogdan Vernescu                M

MICHIGAN                           Grand Rapids        Randall J. Pruim               P
   Calvin College                  Ypsilanti           Christopher E. Hee     PP
   Eastern Michigan University     Hillsdale           Robert J. Hesse
   Hillsdale College               Sault Sainte Marie  John Jaroma and                M
   Lake Superior State University
                                   Southﬁeld              David Baumann       M
   Lawrence Tech. University                           Ruth G. Favro                  O
                                   Adrian              Scott Schneider
   Siena Heights University                            Howard Whitston        H
                                   Dearborn            Toni Carroll           P
   University of Michigan                              Rick V. Trujillo
                                                       David James                    P,P
                                                                              P
MINNESOTA                          Bemidji             Colleen G. Livingston
   Bemidji State University        St. Paul            William M. Kinney              P
   Bethel College                  St. Paul            A. Wayne Roberts
   Macalester College              Northﬁeld           Philip J. Gloor                P,P
   St. Olaf College                Morris              Peh H. Ng                      O
   University of Minnesota                                                    PP
                                                                                      P
                                                                              P
202 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                          CITY          ADVISOR              AB

MISSOURI

Crowder College                      Neosho        Cheryl L. Ingram     P

Missouri Southern State College Joplin             Patrick Cassens      PP

Northwest Missouri State Univ. Maryville           Russell N. Euler     PP

Southeast Missouri State Univ.       Cape Girardeau Robert W. Sheets    H

Truman State University              Kirksville    Steve Jay Smith      P

Washington University                St. Louis     Hiro Mukai           MM

Wentworth Mil. Acad. & Jr. Coll. Lexington         Jacqueline O. Maxwell P P

MONTANTA                             Helena        Philip B. Rose       P
   Carroll College                   Helena        Holly S. Zullo       PP
                                                   Mark J. Keeffe       P
   St. Andrew University

NEBRASKA                             Hastings      David B. Cooke       P
   Hastings College                  Lincoln       Glenn W. Ledder               H
   University of Nebraska

NEVADA                               Reno          Mark M. Meerschaert P
   University of Nevada

NEW JERSEY                           Upper Montclair Michael A. Jones   P
   Montclair State University                                                    M
   Rowan University                  Glassboro     Paul J. Laumakis

NEW YORK                             New York      Ada Peluso           H
   Hunter College, City Univ. of NY  Ithaca        John C. Maceli                P
   Ithaca College                    Riverdale     Kathryn C. Weld
   Manhattan College                 Poughkeepsie  Tracey B. McGrail    P
   Marist College                    Cortland      George F. Feissner            P
   State University of NY                          R. Bruce Mattingly            P
                                                   Edward Connors
U.S. Military Academy                West Point    Gregory Parnell      P
                                                   Donovan D. Phillips           M
Westchester Comm. College            Valhalla      David Sanders                 H
                                                   Sheela L. Whelan
                                                                        O
                                                                                 M

                                                                        P,P

NORTH CAROLINA

Appalachian State University         Boone         Holly P. Hirst          H

                                                   Eric S. Marland         P

Brevard College                      Brevard       Clarke Wellborn         P,P

Davidson College                     Davidson      Laurie J. Heyer         H

Duke University                      Durham        David P. Kraines        O

N.C. School of Sci. & Math.          Durham        Dot Doyle               M
                                                    Results of the 2001 MCM 203

INSTITUTION                     CITY                ADVISOR                 AB

North Carolina State Univ.      Raleigh             Jeffrey S. Scroggs               M,H
University of North Carolina    Wilmington          Russell L. Herman       P
Wake Forest University          Winston-Salem       Miaohua Jiang
Western Carolina University     Cullowhee           Jeffrey Allen Graham             O,M
                                                                                     P
OHIO                            Wooster             Pamela Pierce
   The College of Wooster       Hiram               Brad S. Gubser          P
   Hiram College                University Heights  Angela S. Spalsbury     H
   John Carroll University      Oxford              Doug E. Ward            MP
   Miami University             Oberlin             Elizabeth L. Wilmer     P
   Oberlin College              Athens              David N. Keck           P
   Ohio University              Dayton              Thomas P. Svobodny      P
   Wright State University      Youngstown          Stephen Hanzely         M,P
   Youngstown State University                      Robert Kramer           P
                                                    Thomas Smotzer
OKLAHOMA                        Stillwater                                           P
   Oklahoma State University    Bethany             John E. Wolfe           MH
   Southern Nazarene Univ.      Edmond              Virgil Lee Turner
   Univ. of Central Oklahoma                        Charles Cooper                   P,P
                                                    Dan Endres              H

                                                                                     P
                                                                            P

OREGON                          La Grande           Robert Huotari                   H
   Eastern Oregon University                        Anthony Tovar           H,P
                                                    Jennifer Woodworth
Lewis & Clark College           Portland            Robert W. Owens                  P
Portland State University       Portland            Gerardo A. Lafferriere  M
Southern Oregon University      Ashland             Lisa M. Ciasullo
University of Portland          Portland            Thomas W. Judson                 H,P
                                                                                     M
PENNSYLVANIA                    Bloomsburg          Kevin K. Ferland        P
   Bloomsburg University        Clarion             Jon A. Beal
   Clarion University                               John W. Heard           PH
                                                    James P. Fink                    M
Gettysburg College              Gettysburg          Carl Leinbach
                                                    Sharon L. Stephenson    P
Lafayette College               Easton              Thomas Hill             HH
Shippensburg University         Shippensburg        Cheryl Olsen
Villanova University            Villanova           Bruce Pollack-Johnson            H
Westminster College             New Wilmington      Barbara T. Faires                M
                                                                            M
                                                                            P
                                                                            P
                                                                            M,M
204 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                            CITY          ADVISOR              AB
                                       Providence
RHODE ISLAND                                         David L. Abrahamson     P
   Rhode Island College

SOUTH CAROLINA                         Charleston    Stan Perrine            P,P
   Charleston Southern University      Conway
   Coastal Carolina University         Florence      Ioana Mihaila           P
   Francis Marion University           Columbia
   Midlands Technical College          Aiken         Thomas L. Fitzkee       P
   University of South Carolina        Columbia
                                                     SJohn R. Long           P

                                                     Laurene V. Fausett      M,P

                                                     Ralph E. Howard         M

SOUTH DAKOTA                           Yankton       Jim Miner                     P
   Mount Marty College                 Rapid City    Kyle L. Riley        PP
   S.D. School of Mines & Tech.

TENNESSEE                              Memphis       Cathy W. Carter               P
   Christian Brothers University       Nashville     Mark A. Miller       P
   Lipscomb University

TEXAS                                  Abilene       David Hendricks               H
   Abilene Christian University        San Angelo    Trey Smith           H
   Angelo State University             Waco          Frank H. Mathis      H
   Baylor University                   Georgetown    Therese N. Shelton   P
   Southwestern University             Nacogdoches   Colin L. Starr
   Stephen F. Austin State University  San Antonio   Allen G. Holder               P
   Trinity University                                Jeffrey K. Lawson    P
                                                     Fred M. Loxsom
   University of Houston               Houston       Hector C. Mireles             P
   University of North Texas           Denton        Barbara Lee Keyﬁtz   M
   University of Texas                 Austin        John A. Quintanilla
                                                     Lorenzo A. Sadun              P
UTAH                                   Ogden                              P
   Weber State University
                                       Johnson                                     M
VERMONT                                                                            P
   Johnson State College               Harrisonburg
                                       Richmond      Richard R. Miller    H
VIRGINIA                               Harrisonburg
   Eastern Mennonite University        Ashland       Glenn D. Sproul      PP
   The Governor's School
                                                     John Horst           PH
   James Madison University                          John A. Barnes       PO
                                                     Crista Hamilton      H,P
   Randolph-Macon College                            Caroline Smith
                                                     James S. Sochacki             M
                                                     Bruce F. Torrence    M

                                                                                   P
                                                       Results of the 2001 MCM 205

INSTITUTION                             CITY           ADVISOR              AB

   Roanoke College                      Salem          Jeffrey L. Spielman  H
   University of Richmond               Richmond       Kathy W. Hoke                M
   Univ. of Virginia's College at Wise  Wise           George W. Moss
   Virginia Western Comm. College       Roanoke        Steve T. Hammer      PP
                                                       Ruth A. Sherman              H
                                                                                    P

WASHINGTON                              Tacoma         Mei Zhu              HM
   Paciﬁc Lutheran University           Tacoma
   University of Puget Sound                           DeWayne R. Derryberry P P
                                        Seattle
   University of Washington                            Carol M. Smith            P
                                        Omak
   Wenatchee Valley College             Bellingham     Randall J. LeVeque        H
   Western Washington University
                                                       James Allen Morrow        M

                                                       Kit A. Arbuckle      P

                                                       Saim Ural                 M

                                                       Tjalling Ypma        H,H

WEST VIRGINNIA

West Virginia Wesleyan College          Buckhannon     Jeffery D. Sykes          P

WISCONSIN

Beloit College                          Beloit         Paul J. Campbell          P

Ripon                                   Ripon College  David W. Scott            P

Univ. of Wisconsin≠Stevens Point Stevens Point         Nathan R. Wetzel          P

Univ. of Wisconsin≠Stout                Menomonie      Maria G. Fung             H

Wisconsin Lutheran College              Milwaukee      Marvin C. Papenfuss       P

AUSTRALIA

University of New South Wales           Sydney, NSW    James Franklin            H,H

University of Southern Queensland Toowoomba, QLD Tony J. Roberts                 M

CANADA                                  Brandon, MB    Doug A. Pickering    M
   Brandon University                   Halifax, NS    John C. Clements             P
   Dalhousie University                                Dorette A. Pronk             P
                                                       Andy Foster
Memorial Univ. of Newfoundland St. John's, NF          James A. Brooke      P
                                                       Tom G. Steele        H,P
University of Saskatchewan              Saskatoon, SK  Nicholas A. Derzko   H
                                                       Peter H. Poole
University of Toronto                   Toronto, ON    Juris Steprans               P
University of Western Ontario           London, ON                          M,P
York University                         Toronto, ON
                                                                                    M,H

CHINA

Anhui Mechanical and Electronics Wuhu                  Wang Chuanyu              P

College                                                Wang Geng                 P

                                                       Yang Yimin                P
206 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                                    CITY       ADVISOR          AB
   Anhui University
   Beijing Institute of Technology             Hefei      Cai Qian                 P
   Beijing Union University                    Beijing    Wang Da-peng             H
                                               Beijing    Zhang Quan-bing  P
   Beijing University of Aero. & Astronautics             Chen Yihong      HP
   Beijing University of Chemical Technology   Beijing    Cui Xiaodi       P,P
                                               Beijing    Yao Cuizhen      HP
   Beijing University of Posts & Telecomm.                Jiang Xinhua     P
   Central South University                    Beijing    Ren Kailong              P
   China University of Mining & Technology     Changsha   Wang Xinfeng             P
   Chongqing University                        Xuzhou     Zeng Qingli      P
   Dalian University of Technology             Chongqing  Peng Linping     H,H
   Dong Hua University                         Dalian     Wu Sanxing               P,P
   East China Normal University                Shanghai   Cheng Yan        P
   East China Univ. of Science and Technology  Shanghai   Jiang Guangfeng  M
                                               Shanghai   Liu Daming       P
   Fudan University                                       Wenyan Yuan      M
   Guangdong Commercial College                Shanghai   He Zuguo                 M,H
                                               Guangzhou  Luo Shoushan     P,P
                                                          Zhang Hong-yan   P
                                                          Zheng Zhou-shun          M
                                                          Wu Zongxiang     PP
                                                          Zhu Kaiyong      PP
                                                          Gong Qu          PH
                                                          Li Fu                    P
                                                          Zhan Lezhou      H
                                                          Ding Yongsheng           M
                                                          He Mingfeng      HP
                                                          Yu Hongquan              H
                                                          Hu Liangjian             H
                                                          Lu Yunsheng      P
                                                          Jiang Lumin      P
                                                          Zhen Dong Yuan           P
                                                          Liu Zhaohui              M
                                                          Lu Yuanhong      H
                                                          Qin Yan          H
                                                          Shi Jinsong              H
                                                          Cai Zhijie       P,P
                                                          Gong XueQing     PP
                                                          Xu Qinfeng               P
                                                          Xiang Zigui      PP
                                                        Results of the 2001 MCM 207

INSTITUTION                                    CITY     ADVISOR         AB
   Harbin Engineering University
                                               Harbin   Gao Zhenbin     M
   Harbin Institute of Technology                                       H
   Hefei University of Technology                       Luo Yuesheng
   Hu Ning (individual, one-member team)                                      P
   Information & Engineering University                 Shen Jihong           P
                                                                        MP
   Jiading No. 1 High School                            Zhang Xiaowei   H
   Jiamusi University                                                         P
                                               Harbin   Shang Shouting  PH
   Jilin University of Technology                                       P,P
   Jinan University                                     Shao Jiqun            P
   Nanjing Nankai University                                            P
   Nanjing Normal University                            Wang Xuefeng    P
                                                                              P
   Nanjing University                          Hefei    Du Xueqiao            H
   Nanjing University of Science & Technology                           P
                                                        Huang Youdu           M
   Nankai University                                                    P
   National University of Defence Technology   Suzhou                         P
   North China Institute of Technology                                  P
                                               Zhengzhou Han Zhonggeng        P
                                                                        MP
                                                        Li Bin                P,P
                                                                              P
                                                        Lu Zhibo        PP
                                                                        H
                                                        Zhang Wujun           P,P
                                                                        H
                                               Jiading  Chen Gan              P
                                                                        P
                                                        Wang Yu               P
                                                                        P
                                               Jiamusi  Bai Fengshan          H,P
                                                                        P
                                                        Fan Wui         H
                                                                        P
                                                        Gu Lizhi              P
                                                                        H
                                                        Liu Yuhui             P,P
                                                                        H
                                               Changchun Fang Peichen   HP
                                                                        HM
                                                        Yang Yinsheng         P
                                                                        P
                                               Guangzhou Hu Daiqiang    H

                                                        Ye Shi Qi

                                               Tianjin  Liang Ke

                                                        Ruan Jishou

                                                        Zhou Xingwei

                                               Nanjing  Chen Bo

                                                        Chen Xin

                                                        Fu Shitai

                                                        Zhu Qun-Sheng

                                               Nanjing  Yao Tianxing

                                               Nanjing  Wu Xingming

                                                        Xu Chun Gen

                                                        Yang Jian

                                                        Yu Jun

                                               Tianjin  Ke Liang

                                                        Ruan Jishou

                                                        Zhou Xingwei

                                               Changsha Lu Shirong

                                                        Wu Mengda

                                               Taiyuan  Lei Ying-jie

                                                        Xue Ya-kui

                                                        Yong Bi
208 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                             CITY       ADVISOR             AB
   Northeastern University              Shenyang
                                                   Cui Jianjiang              P
Northwest Inst. of Texile Sci. & Tech.  Xi'an      Han Tie-min                P
Northwest University                    Xi'an      Hao Peifeng                P
Northwestern Polytechnic University     Xi'an      Xiao Wendong               M
                                                   Xue Dingyu                 P
Peking University                       Beijing    He XingShi          PH
                                                   He Rui-chan                P,P
Second Aero. Inst. of the Air Force     ChangChun  Hua Peng Guo               H
                                                   Liu Xiao Dong       H
Shandong University                     Jinan      Shi Yi Min          H
                                                   Zhang Sheng Gui            P
Shanghai Foreign Language School        Shanghai   Deng Minghua        PP
Shanghai Jiaotong University            Shanghai   Lei Gongyan                H,P
                                                   Shu Yousheng        HH
Shanghai Maritime University            Shanghai   Zhang Shaohuai and
Shanghai Normal University              Shanghai                       P,P
                                                       Fu Deyou        P
Shanghai Univ. of Finance and Econ. Shanghai       Ma Piming           P
                                                   Ma Zhengyuan
Shanxi University                       Taiyuan    Li Qun Pan                 M,P,P
                                                   Huang Jianguo              P,P
Sichuan University                      Chengdu    Song Baorui         HP
                                                   Sheng Zining        P
South China University of Technology Guangzhou     Guo Shenghuan              P
                                                   Zhang Jizhou               P
Southeast University                    Nanjing    Zhu Detong                 H
Tianjin University                      Tianjin    Feng Suwei                 H
                                                   Yang Xiaobin        H
                                                   Li Jihong           P
                                                   Yang Aimin                 P
                                                   Zhang Xianwen              P
                                                   Zhao Aimin          P
                                                   Li Huang                   P
                                                   Liu Xiaoshi                P
                                                   Yang Zhihe                 P
                                                   Zhou Jie            P
                                                   Liang Manfa                P
                                                   Lin Jianliang              M
                                                   Tao Zhisui                 H
                                                   Zhu Fengfeng        H
                                                   Chen En-shui        MP
                                                   Huang Jun                  H,H
                                                   Dong Wenjun         M
                                                   Liu Zeyi            P
                                                   Wenhua Hou                 P
                                                     Results of the 2001 MCM 209

INSTITUTION                             CITY         ADVISOR                AB
   Tsinghua University
   University of Elec. Science & Tech.  Beijing      Hu Zhi-Ming            PH
                                        Chengdu      Ye Jun                 HH
   University of Sci. & Tech. of China               Wang Jiangao           PH
                                        Hefei        Xu Quanzhi
   Wuhan University (WUHEE)                          Zhong Erjie                  P
   Wuhan University of Tech.            Wuhan        Gu Iajun               P
   Xi'an Inst. of Post & Telecomm.      Wuhan        Yang Jian
   Xi'an Jiaotong University            Xi'an        Yang Liu                     M
   Xi'an University of Technology       Xi'an        Yong Ni                      H
   Xidian University                    Xi'an        Chen Gui Xing          P
                                        Xian         Huang Chongchao        P
   YanShan University                                Huang Zhang-Can        P
   Zhejiang University                  QinHuangDao  Li Changxing and             M
   Zhongshan University                 Hangzhou                            P
                                        Guangzhou       Fan Jiulun
ENGLAND                                              Dai Yonghong                 P
   University of Oxford                              Zhou Yicang            P
                                                     Cao Maosheng           H
FINLAND                                              Chen Hui-chan          PP
   P‰ivˆl‰ College                                   Liu Hong-wei           H
                                                     Zhang Zhuo-kui
HONG KONG                                            Zhou Shui-sheng              H
   Hong Kong Baptist University                      Wang YongMao           H
                                                     Zhong XiaoZhu
IRELAND                                              He Yong                      P
   National University of Ireland                    Yang Qifan                   P
   Trinity College Dublin                            Bao Yun                PP
   University College Cork                           Chen Zepeng            MM
                                                     Li Caiwei              MM
                                                     Yin Xiaoling           H
                                                                            M
                                                                            H
                                                                                  P

                                        Oxford       Maciek Dunajski        H

                                        Tarttila     Merikki Lappi          M,H

                                        Kowloon Tong W.C. Shiu              H
                                                               C.S. Tong          P

                                        Galway       Niall Madden           PH
                                        Dublin       Timothy G. Murphy            H
                                        Cork         James Joseph Grannell
                                                     Donal J. Hurley        O
                                                     Brian J. Twomey        H
                                                                            H
210 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

INSTITUTION                  CITY       ADVISOR                A  B
University College Dublin    Dublin
                                        Peter Duffy            M
                                        Maria G. Meehan                   P,P

LITHUANIA

Vilnius University           Vilnius    Ricardas Kudzma           P

SINGAPORE

National Univ. of Singapore  Singapore  Lim Leong Chye Andrew     M

SOUTH AFRICA                 Matieland  Jan H. van Vuuren      O  H
   Stellenbosch University

Editor's Note

For team advisors from China and Singapore, we have endeavored to list family
name ﬁrst, with the help of Susanna Chang '03.
                                                                          Spokes or Discs? 211

Spokes or Discs?

W.D.V. De Wet
D.F. Malan
C. Mumbeck

Stellenbosch University
Matieland, Western Cape
South Africa

Advisor: Jan H. van Vuuren

Introduction

    It is well known that disc wheels and standard spoked wheels exhibit differ-
ent performance characteristics on the race track, but as yet no reliable means
exist to determine which is superior for a given set of conditions.

    We create a model that, taking the properties of wheel, cyclist, and course
into account, may provide a deﬁnitive answer to the question, "Which wheel
should I use today?" The model provides detailed output on wheel perfor-
mance and can produce a chart indicating which wheel will provide optimal
performance for a given environmental and physical conditions.

    We use laws of physics, plus data from various Web sites and published
sources, then numerical methods to obtain solutions from the model.

    We demonstrate the use of the model's output on a sample course. Roughly
speaking, standard spoked wheels perform better on steep climbs and trailing winds,
while disc wheels are better in most other cases.

    We did some validation of the model for stability, sensitivity, and realism.
We also generalised it to allow for a third type of wheel, to provide a more
realistic representation of the choice facing the professional cyclist today.

    A major difﬁculty was obtaining reliable data; sources differed or even con-
tradicted one another. The range of the data that we could ﬁnd was insufﬁcient,
jeopardizing the accuracy of our results.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2000) 211≠223. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
212 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Analysis of the Problem

    Consider the system of a cyclist and the racing cycle. The cyclist provides
the energy to drive the bicycle against the forces of drag (from contact with air),
friction (from contact between wheels and ground), and gravity (which opposes
progress up a slope). Furthermore, when accelerating, the cyclist must provide
the energy to set the wheels rotating, due to their moment of inertia.

    The primary problem is to determine, for a given set of conditions, which
type of rear wheel is the most effective. "Effectiveness" is what a speciﬁc rider
desires from the equipment. We assume that the rider desires to complete
the course in as short a time as possible, or with the least possible energy
expenditure. These deﬁnitions are closely linked: A rider who expends more
energy to maintain a certain speed will soon tire and will therefore have a lower
maintainable speed.

    The differences between standard 32-spoke wheels and disc wheels lie in
weight and in their aerodynamic properties. Given the right wind conditions
(which we investigate), the disc wheels should allow air to pass the cyclist/cycle
combination with less turbulence, that is, less drag. However, disc wheels
weigh more, which affects the amount of power required to move the wheels up
a slope and to begin rotating the wheels from rest (such as when accelerating).

    To examine which type of wheel performs the best under which conditions,
we need to determine which wheel allows the greatest speed given speciﬁc
conditions or, equivalently, which wheel requires the least power to drive.

    The greatest difﬁculty is that air resistance is a function of speed while speed
is a function of air resistance. The model needs to utilise numerical methods to
calculate the speed that a rider can maintain with the given parameters.

    There are other factors to consider, too. Disc wheels are not very stable in
gusty wind conditions, since they provide a far greater surface area to cross-
winds; with a greater moment of inertia, they accelerate more slowly; and their
greater weight may provide more grip on wet roads.

Assumptions and Hypothesis

    We investigated the performance of the wheel types noted in Table 1. The
wheel data do not conform to any speciﬁc make or model but are typical.

                    Table 1.
              Types of wheels.

Type          Standard 32-spoke  Aero wheel (trispoke)  Solid disc wheel

Diameter (m)            0.7                  0.7                 0.7
Mass (kg)               0.8                  1.0                 1.3

    We assume that the cyclist uses a standard spoke wheel in the front and
either a disc wheel or standard 32-spoked wheel at the back. We also brieﬂy
                                      Spokes or Discs? 213

examine aero wheels, which are not solid but more aerodynamic than standard
spoked wheels. We refer to the three types as standard, aero, and disc.

    We assume that the rider and cycle frame (excluding wheels) exhibit the
same drag for all wind directions.

                            Table 2.
                       Symbols used.

Symbol        Unit     Deﬁnition

A              m2      area of rider/bicycle exposed to wind
ca      dimensionless
crr     dimensionless  variable coefﬁcient of axial air resistance for speciﬁc wheel
cw      dimensionless  constant of rolling resistance
D                      constant of air resistance
Fad            m2      reference area of wheel
         Newton (N)    axial air resistance
Fad
         Newton (N)           (against the cyclist's direction of motion)
Fg                     axial air resistance on a bicycle with box-rimmed spoked wheels in a
Frr      Newton (N)
g        Newton (N)        headwind
M                      effect of gravity on the cyclist
P            m/s2      rolling resistance
vbg            kg      gravitational constant
vwb                    mass of cyclist and cycle
vwg        Watt (W)    rider's effective power output
              m/s      speed of the bike relative to the ground
              m/s      speed of the wind relative to the bike
              m/s      speed of the wind relative to the ground
                       angle of the rise
             degree    yaw angle, the angle between the direction
             degree
                          opposing bicycle motion and perceived wind
             degree           (A relative headwind has a yaw of 0.)

            percent    angle between wind direction (vwg) and direction of motion
            kg/m3             (A straight-on headwind has  = 180.)

                       grade of hill, the sine of , the angle of the rise
                       air density

Forces at Work

    For a bicycle moving at a constant velocity, there are three signiﬁcant re-
tarding forces (Figure 1):

rolling resistance, due to contact between the tires and road;

gravitational resistance, if the road is sloped; and

air resistance, usually the largest of the three.

When accelerating, the rider also uses energy to overcome translational and
rotational inertia, although the model does not take these into account.
214 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                     Figure 1. Diagram of forces.

   The forces of rolling resistance and gravity are as follows:

                                  Frr = crr ∑ (normal force)
                                       = crrM g cos 
                                       = crrM g cos arcsin 

                                       = crrM g 1 - 2,
                                   Fg = M g sin  = M g.

   Calculating the axial drag force is more complicated. The air resistance is

f  =  1    ∑ cwAv2,  where   v  is   the  speed   of  the     air  relative      to  the  object.  Since  we
      2
assume that the area of the rider/frame exposed to the wind is constant, we

have (neglecting the additional drag on the wheels caused by yaw and type of

wheel)               Fad             Avw2 b

                          =  1    ∑          cos            (axial component).
                             2

Observe the sketches in Figure 2. From them we derive that

           vw2 b = vw2 g(axial) + vw2 g(side)
                = vbg + vwg cos(180 - ) 2 + vwg sin(180 - ) 2
                = (vbg - vwg cos )2 + (vwg sin )2
                = vbg2 - 2vbgvwg cos  + vw2 g.

   Also,                                                                 vwg sin 

            = arctan vwg(side)                    = arctan         vbg - vw cos           .
                            vwg(axial)

   The axial air drag on the rear wheel [Tew and Sayers 1999] is

                             Fad(wheel)      =  0.75  ∑  1    ∑  caD  ∑  vw2 b;
                                                         2

the 0.75 is because a rear wheel experiences 75% of the drag of a wheel in free
air, due to interference of the gear cluster, frame, cyclist's legs, and so forth.
                                                                         Spokes or Discs? 215

                                     Figure 2a. Wind speed relative to wheel.

                                             Figure 2b. Forces on wheel.

    For the three basic types of wheel, Tew and Sayers [1999] give typical curves
of the axial drag coefﬁcient ca vs. yaw angle (0    30); this interval
accounts for the majority of conditions experienced by a rider. We approximate
these curves by straight lines (a close match).

    The curves for different relative wind speeds are very much alike for the
standard wheel and the aero wheel. The disc wheel, however, shows major
variation for different relative wind speeds.

    Since the axial drag coefﬁcient must be zero at  = 90, and by observing
the shape of the curves, we extrapolated to larger yaw angles using a sine-
shaped curve through ca = 0 at  = 90, with an appropriate scaling to ensure
continuity. Without wind-tunnel testing, the accuracy cannot be guaranteed.

    Comparing the percentage of power dissipated by drag on one wheel (ac-
cording to the model) with the data of Tew and Sayers [1999], we found a high
degree of agreement. Typically, 1% to 10% (depending on wheel type) of the
power is dissipated by drag on the wheels.

    From Fad(wheel) we subtracted the drag experienced by a normal (box-
rimmed) wheel under headwind, since it was already taken account in Fad.
216 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

The axial air drag on the bicycle is thus given by

Fad  =  Fad  +  Fad(wheel)  =  1  vw2 b[cw  A  cos    + 0.75(ca  - 0.06)D],
                               2

where 0.06 is the coefﬁcient of axial drag for a normal wheel in a headwind.
The cos  gives the component in the direction of motion of the cyclist.

Calculating Results for a Typical Rider

    For data, we used standard values [Analytic Cycling 2001] for a road racer
near sea level in normal atmospheric conditions:

M = 80 kg,                    g = 9.81 m/s2,
crr = 0.004,                cw = 0.5,
                             D = 0.38 m2 (for a 700 mm wheel),
 A = 0.5 m2,
   = 1.226 kg/m3            (could be changed to incorporate altitude).

    We calculated that, to maintain a speed of 45 km/h on a level road (as in
the problem description), the rider must deliver 340 W of effective pedaling
power.

The Computer Program

    We wrote a computer program in Pascal that calculates the speed that the
rider can sustain for a given vwg, , and . It does this by trying a speed and
determining the wattage necessary to sustain the speed. If the wattage is too
high, the speed is lowered; otherwise, the speed is increased. Every time the
solution point is crossed, the step size is reduced. The process is carried out
until the wattage used is within a tolerance 0.01 W to P .

    To take into account the effect of drag on different types of wheels, our
program does the following:

1. The wind direction, wind speed relative to the ground, and slope of the road
   (, vwg, and ) are provided as inputs.

2. The program tries a value for vbg.

3. Frr and Fg are calculated.

4. From , vwg, , and vbg, we calculate vwb and .

5. From vwb and , we calculate Fad.

6. We calculate the wattage by using the formula P = (Frr + Fg + Fad)vbg.

7. We compare the calculated value of P to the known value of 340 W.
                                                                         Spokes or Discs? 217

8. We try a new value for vbg, depending on whether the wattage required for
   the previous value of vbg was higher or lower than the available 340 W.

9. We repeat this process from Step 3 until the maximum maintainable speed
   is determined.
    Since the wheel that requires the least power in a set of circumstances also

enables the highest speed, we used our program to vary the speed of the wind
and show which wheel is best for the circumstances. Figure 3 shows a screen
shot. The dark colour represents blue and the light colour red. Each of the 11
horizontal strips represents a road gradient, ranging from 0 at the top to 0.1 at
the bottom in 0.01 increments.

                                        Figure 3. Screen shot from program.

    The horizontal axis is wind speed, from 0 km/h at the left to 63.9 km/h at
the right in 0.1 km/h increments. The vertical axis of each bar is the wind angle
(relative to track), from 0 to 180 in 15 increments.

    We have a very compact representation showing the transition wind speeds
for a range of wind angles and road gradients. The user is provided a crosshair
to move over any point on the graph. The colour of a pixel indicates the better
wheel to use for the corresponding gradient, wind speed, and wind angle.

    To generate a table of transition speeds (Table 3), we read off the points
at which transitions occur. This might seem cumbersome, but developing an
algorithm to ﬁnd the transition points is very difﬁcult, since the number of tran-
sitions is not known beforehand and the functions exhibit irregular behaviour.

    To use the table, look up the particular entry corresponding to the road
grade and the angle that the wind makes with the forward direction of the
bike. An entry of S means that a standard wheel performs better for all wind
speeds, a D indicates that a disc wheel is better at all wind speeds.
218 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                      Table 3.
Which wheel to use, as a function of road grade and wind angle.

Road     Angle of wind (in degrees) relative to bike's direction
grade
         0          15                 30         45

<0       D          D                  D          D

0        D          D46.5S             D36.6S     D

0.01     D          D27.8S             D22.6S     D21.3S47.3D

0.02 D44.5S         D16.5S             D13.3S     D12.3S53.8D

0.03 D24.2S D9.4S47.6D54.5S D7.3S56.6D            D6.5S

0.04 D12.3S         D4.8S         D3.5S42.0D      D3.0S

0.05 D4.2S          S                  S33.9D     S

0.06     S          S63.4D        S54.8D61.8S S38.6D46.2S

0.07     S          S             S55.6D59.1S S32.3D46.5S

0.08     S          S                  S          S28.0D45.8S

0.09     S          S                  S          S24.9D44.8S

0.10     S          S                  S          S

Road     Angle of wind (in degrees) relative to bike's direction
grade
            60          75             90         105

<0          D           D              D          D

0           D           D              D          D

0.01 D22.1S33.6D        D              D          D

0.02 D12.7S39.1D D14.5S32.0D           D          D

0.03 D6.4S43.2D D6.9S35.1D D8.5S30.6D D14.2S23.8D

0.04 D2.9S47.9D D2.8S37.2D D3.2S33.4D D3.8S29.6D

0.05        S       S40.0D             S34.7D     S32.4D

0.06        S       S42.8D             S35.7D     S34.2D

0.07        S       S46.6D             S37.5D     S35.5D

0.08        S           S              S39.2D     S36.4D

0.09        S           S              S40.6D     S37.2D

0.10        S           S              S42.1D     S37.8D

Road Angle of wind (in degrees) relative to bike's direction

grade          120  135           150      165    180

    <0          D       D         D            D  D

      0         D       D         D            D  D

   0.01         D       D         D            D  D

   0.02         D       D         D            D  D

   0.03         D       D         D            D  D

   0.04 D6.1S22.1D      D         D            D  D

   0.05     S28.0D  S17.4D        D            D  D

   0.06     S31.1D S23.7D S15.4D S8.3D S1.7D

   0.07     S33.3D S27.9D S19.8D S13.7D S6.5D

   0.08     S34.9D S30.6D S23.0D S17.5D S10.5D

   0.09     S36.3D S32.5D S25.5D S20.2D S13.8D

   0.10     S37.4D S34.1D S27.6D S22.6D S16.8D
                                                                         Spokes or Discs? 219

    The other entries can be decoded as follows: A number between two letter
entries indicates at which wind speed a transition occurs; the ﬁrst letter indi-
cates which wheel is most efﬁcient at lower speeds, and the second number
which wheel is best at higher speeds. For example, S28.0D indicates that stan-
dard wheels are better at speeds below 28.0 km/h. An entry of D6.1S22.1D
indicates that the standard wheel performs better at speeds between 6.1 and
22.1 km/h, while the disc wheel performs better at all other wind speeds.

    The table applies for wind speeds up to 64 km/h. Strong winds are very
rare and a disc wheel will cause major stability problems in these conditions.

    As an aside, we created graphs comparing standard, aero, and disc wheels
simultaneously and allowed for negative gradients as well. The aero wheel
dominated in most conditions.

Applying the Table to a Sample Course

    We designed a simple time-trial course. The map of the course and a view
of the elevation are given in Figure 4. The course consists of four different
segments, with each turning point labelled with a letter. The data for each
point are in Table 4.

Figure 4a.                                 Figure 4b.

                          Table 4.
            Details of the sample course.

Point       Map coordinates (km, km) Elevation (m)

A (Start)   (0,36)                          600
B           (40,36)                         200
C           (52,24)                        1600
D           (36,20)                        1580
E (Finish)  (36,4)                         2350

    Assume that the wind is blowing at 25 km/h in the direction shown on the
map. For each segment, we compute the gradient and the angle of the segment
220 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

with the wind by trigonometry. The length of each segment is slightly longer
than the straight-line distance, because the road is not perfectly straight.

    We look at Table 3 to determine the best wheel for each section of the
course. For instance, in the second section, the gradient is 0.08 and the angle
135; according to the table, the standard wheel is better at a wind speed below
30.6 km/h, so at 25 km/h, a standard wheel is better for this section. We ﬁll in
the other entries in a similar manner (Table 5).

                                        Table 5.
             Best wheel for each section of the sample course.

       Section Distance (km) Wind angle () Gradient Best wheel

       AB           40.8             180    -0.01               Disc

       BC           17.5             135    0.08                Standard

       CD           16.7             14     0.00                Disc

       DE           16.2             90     0.05                Standard

    The disc wheel and the standard wheel both win in two segments. However,
the disc wheel wins over 58 km of the course, while the standard wheel wins
over only 33 km. Thus, the table advises that the cyclist use the disc wheel.

Getting More Reﬁned Results

    For each section, we calculated the expected speed for the rider with each
wheel. We add the times for the individual sections to obtain an estimate of
the total time, obtaining Table 6. The table shows two interesting results:

∑ The disc wheel beats the standard wheel by about 50 s. This is consistent
   with the result obtained earlier in this section.

∑ The aero wheel is almost 2 min faster than the disc wheel!

                                     Table 6.
             Total time for sample course for each wheel.

             Standard wheel               Aero wheel            Disc wheel

Section Length Speed Time taken Speed Time taken Speed Time taken
               (km) (km/h) (h:min:sec) (km/h) (h:min:sec) (km/h) (h:min:sec)

AB     40.8  32.73        1:14:47.6  33.27  1:13:34.8           33.46     1:13:09.7

BC     17.5  12.56        1:23:35.9  12.68  1:22:48.5           12.47     1:24:12.1

CD     16.7  59.52        0:16:50.1  60.13  0:16:39.8           59.97     0:16:42.5

DE     16.2  19.72        0:49:17.4  19.94  0:48:44.8           19.58 0:49:38.6

Total  91.2               3:44:31           3:41:48                       3:43:43
                                                                         Spokes or Discs? 221

Validating the Model

Sensitivity Analysis

    Does the table generated for one rider with a speciﬁc set of physical at-
tributes apply to another rider, and if not, can the model easily be adjusted?

    To determine whether the same table could be used for different riders,
we varied one of the rider's parameters, either power output, mass, or cross-
sectional surface area, while keeping the others constant. In these analyses we
found that

∑ Changing any one or any combination of the parameters P , A, or M does
   not affect the basic pattern but slightly distorts (shifts, scales, or skews) it.

∑ Every rider-cycle combination would need its own chart for determining
   which wheel to use at which speed.

Other Validation

    We compared our model's output to data available at Analytic Cycling
[2001], which provides interactive forms. Our model's output matched their
output almost exactly for all the different combinations of input parameters
that we used. Unfortunately, this site does not make provision for wind speed
or angle, so this part of our model could not be compared.

    We tested the model with a completely different set of parameters approx-
imating a very powerful sports car (P = 300 kW, Cd = 0.3, A = 2.3 m2,
M = 1100 kg). We kept the other parameters the same. Our model predicted
a top speed of 320 km/h on a level road, which seemed very realistic.

Error Analysis

    We were concerned about the disc wheel "islands" that showed up in our
graphical output at wind speeds of 40≠50 km/h, wind angles of 30≠60, and
higher gradients (see Figure 3). They probably are due to the peculiar behaviour
of disc wheels in crosswinds. Since we extrapolated the drag coefﬁcient func-
tion, we have no way of knowing whether this strange behaviour is realistic or
not.

Model Strengths

    If a rider can obtain reasonably accurate course data (something that is not
difﬁcult at all), then the rider can determine exactly what type of rear wheel to
use for a race by referencing this information to a chart or computer.
222 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    The model has many parameters (air density, coefﬁcients, rider mass, etc.)
that can be adjusted to account for various situations.

    It is easy to extend the model to include the front wheel of the bicycle.

Model Weaknesses

    When the angle of the wind with the cyclist changes, there are a number
of factors that inﬂuence the amount of drag that the cyclist experiences. The
most obvious is the changing surface area; a cyclist from the side presents a far
larger surface area to the wind than a cyclist heading into the wind.

    Less obvious, but still a large contributing factor, is that the drag coefﬁcient
is a function of the shape of the object. A cyclist from the side is far less
streamlined and has a higher drag coefﬁcient.

    Both these factors are extremely difﬁcult to model. The cross-sectional sur-
face area of a complex three-dimensional shape could be the subject of a paper
on its own, and determining the drag coefﬁcient of the same complex shape
would require empirical tests.

    As a result, we ignored these effects and assume that the drag coefﬁcient and
cross-sectional surface area of the rider are the same for all directions. Strong
cross-winds would cause too much rider instability to even consider using disc
wheels, so it would not really be necessary to investigate drag in such cases.

    We also ignored the effects of the energy needed to overcome the rotational
and translational inertia for each wheel. We cannot comment on the effect of
these forces, since we did not have time to implement these effects.

    The model is only as accurate as the data used, and much of the available
data on wheel drag is, at best, dubious. Many wheel manufacturers exaggerate
the performance of their brands, while rival manufacturers quickly denounce
their ﬁndings. Further, few data were available for yaw angles greater than
30, and we were forced to extrapolate, leading to a high degree of uncertainty.

    Using the table requires speciﬁc information about rider characteristics,
some of which may be difﬁcult to obtain, such as the surface area of rider and
bicycle.

Conclusion

    Our model provides a good means for making an informed decision as to
which wheel to use in a particular situation, but it needs more accurate data
and reﬁnement.
                                                                         Spokes or Discs? 223

References

Analytic Cycling. 2001. http://www.analyticcycling.com .
Basis Systeme Netzwerk. 2001. Wheel aerodynamics. http://www.bsn.com .
Beaconsﬁeld Cycling Club. 2001. Aero wheels under scrutiny.

    http://www.clubcycliste.com/english/archives/freewheel98/
    freew498/f498aero.html .
Campagnola. 2001. http://www.campagnola.com .
Drag forces in formulas. 2001. http://www.damopjinard.com/aero/formulas.
    htm .
Mavic cycles. 2001. http://www.mavic.com .
Tew, G.S., and A.T. Sayers. 1999. Aerodynamics of yawed racing cycle wheels.
    Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics 82: 209≠221.

Acknowledgments

    We would like to thank the Department of Applied Mathematics at Stel-
lenbosch University for the generous use of their computing facilities and for
catering for us during the weekend of the competition.
224 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 225

Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type

Nicholas J. Howard
Zachariah R. Miller
Matthew R. Adams

United States Military Academy
West Point, NY

Advisor: Donovan D. Phillips

Introduction

    We present a model that compares the performance of various wheels over
a user-determined course. We approach the modeling problem by beginning
with Newton's Second Law of Motion: The sum of the forces acting on an object
equals the mass of that object multiplied by its acceleration.

    We identify the four principal forces that contribute to a cyclist's motion:
applied force, drag force, gravity, and rolling resistance. We further classify
drag force into three components: the cyclist and bicycle frame, the front wheel,
and the rear wheel.

    Drag force is dependent on a cyclist's velocity, and the force of gravity is
dependent on a cyclist's position. Thus, our force equation is a function of
cyclist position and cyclist velocity.

    We can then arrange Newton's Second Law to yield a second-order differ-
ential equation. Given position S, velocity dS/dt, acceleration d2S/dt2, mass
m, and a force function F , the differential equation is

              d2S               =  F  S,  dS  .
              dt2                         dt

                                      m

    To implement our model, we created a computer software program that
allows a user to input numerous pieces of data, including course layout, eleva-
tion proﬁle, wind, weather conditions, and cyclist characteristics. The software
iterates the differential equation using the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method.
The software reports the preferred wheel choice based on the data.

    As a real-world application of our model, we analyze the 2000 Olympic
Cycling time-trial race. Over that course, a disk wheel provided a considerable
advantage over a spoked wheel.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 225≠239. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
226 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Problem Analysis

    We must determine whether a spoked wheel (lighter but less aerodynamic)
or a disk wheel (more aerodynamic but heavier) is more power-efﬁcient. The
choice depends on many factors, including the number and steepness of hills,
the weather, wind speed and direction, and type of competition.

    We are not striving to discover which wheel is best for all situations. To the
contrary, we are interested in which wheel outperforms other wheels given spe-
ciﬁc conditions. Given accurate data concerning factors such as hills, weather,
wind, and competition type, a good model will be able to determine and rec-
ommend which wheel is preferred.

Our Approach

    We determine equations for each force that acts on the cyclist and the bicycle.
These forces are not constant throughout a race. For example, air drag increases
with the square of velocity.

    We apply Newton's Second Law of Motion to the cyclist-bicycle system:
The sum of the forces acting on an object equals mass of the object times its
acceleration. The sum of the forces is a function of both position on the course
and velocity of the cyclist. Because the forces are different at different positions,
the power required with a given type of wheel is also different. Our approach
is to apply the same power to both types of wheels and determine how long it
takes to traverse the course. The wheel that allows the cyclist to complete the
course in the shortest time requires less power, that is, is more power-efﬁcient.

    A more comprehensive model would incorporate wind based upon a prob-
abilistic function. However, to do so would be at odds with our goal: We wish
to determine performance times for two types of wheels given a constant set of
conditions. If we included probabilistic functions, differing performance times
would be due to both wheel differences and random ﬂuctuations instead of
just to wheel differences.

    Let the position of the bicycle on the course be S with components Sx, Sy,
and Sz. The second-order differential equation for acceleration is

              d2S  =  F           S,  dS  ,
              dt2                     dt

                                  m

where d2S/dt2 is the acceleration, F (S, dS/dt) is the total force, and m is the
total mass of the system.

    We determine the time that it takes to complete a course by solving this
equation numerically.
                                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 227

Assumptions

∑ Weather conditions (temperature, humidity, wind direction, and wind speed)
   are uniform over the course and constant throughout the race. Because wind
   varies over time, and terrain signiﬁcantly changes wind speed and direction,
   larger courses with greater variability in elevation are most affected by this
   assumption. However, due to the unpredictability of the weather, a general
   wind direction and speed is probably the most detailed information to which
   the rider will have access.

∑ Both wheel types use the same tire.

∑ Turning does not signiﬁcantly affect power efﬁciency of the wheel, speed of
   the rider, or acceleration of the rider.

∑ Based on the previous assumption, we assume that the bicycle moves in a
   linear path in 3-D space.

∑ The cyclist applies power according to the function that we develop in the
   Model Design section below, where we introduce other assumptions asso-
   ciated with developing this function.

∑ The drag coefﬁcient for the rider plus bike frame is the same for all riders
   and does not change as a function of yaw angle. The drag coefﬁcient is 0.5
   and the cross sectional area is 0.5 m2 [Analytic Cycling 2001a].

∑ The wheels do not slip in any direction as they roll over the course.

∑ Other riders have no effect on the aerodynamic characteristics of the bike-
   rider system. This means that we ignore the effects of drafting (which can
   reduce drag by up to 25%).

∑ The rider uses a conventional 36-spoke wheel on the front of the bike.

∑ The rotational moments of inertia for disc wheels and spoke wheels are
   approximately 0.1000 kg-m2 and 0.0528 kg-m2, respectively. In reality, these
   must be determined experimentally.

Model Design

    We identify the forces that act on a bicycle and rider:

∑ The forward force that the rider applies with pedaling.

∑ The drag force that opposes the motion of the bicycle. Since we are concerned
   with analyzing wheel performance, we divide the total drag force into three
   components:
228 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

      ≠ The drag force Ff on the front wheel.

      ≠ The drag force Fr on the rear wheel.

      ≠ The drag force FB on the bicycle frame and rider.

∑ The force of gravity Fg that either opposes or aids motion due to the road
   grade.

∑ The force of rolling resistance Frr due to the compression and deformation
   of air in the tires.

    Because we assume that the bicycle travels in a linear path, we need consider
only components of these forces that act co-axially (i.e., parallel to the bicycle's
direction of movement). This will remain realistic so long as the assumption that
the wheels do not slip remains true, because the static frictional force between
the wheels and the ground prevents movement normal to the velocity.

    Consequently, we do not need to treat the forces as vectors; we must note
only whether they aid or oppose the bike's movement.

The Force that the Rider Applies

    The rider applies a force to the pedals, which the gears translate to the wheels
of the bicycle. Competitive bicycle racers generally shift gears to maintain
a constant force on the pedals as well as a constant pedaling rate (cadence)
whenever the sum of the other forces oppose the motion (i.e., going up a hill
or into the wind) [Harris Cyclery 2001]. In other words, the cyclist attempts to
exert constant power.

    However, as the rider moves downhill, gravity aids the effort. As the bicycle
gains speed, the rider's pedaling results in a diminished effect on speed because
drag forces increase with the square of speed. Eventually, at a speed vcutoff, the
rider ceases pedaling.

    We model the power Pa that the rider inputs as a function of speed vg:

Pa =  0,                          if vg  vcutoff;
      Pavg,                       if vg < vcutoff,

where Pavg is the average power that the rider can sustain; its value varies from
rider to rider and with the type of race. Typical values range from 200 W for
casual riders to between 420≠460 W for Olympic athletes on long-distance road
races, to as much as 1500 W in sprint races [Seiler 2001].

    If we assume that there is no energy lost in the translation of the power
between the pedal and the wheel (i.e., in the gears), then by conservation of
energy the power goes into either rotating the wheels or moving the bicycle
forward:

      Pa = Pw + Pf ,                                (1)
                                                   Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 229

where Pw is the power to rotate the wheels and Pf is the power to drive the

bicycle forward.

From     elementary  physics,  the    rotational       kinetic         energy    of  an  object  is  1  I  2  ,
                                                                                                     2
where I is the rotational moment of inertia and  is the angular velocity of the

object. For the front and rear wheels, we have

                     Kf   =    1  If  2   ,        Kr     =     1  Ir  2  ,
                               2                                2

where If and Ir are the rotational moments of inertia of the front and rear
wheels. The total rotational energy KT of the wheels is then

                               KT = Kf + Kr.

The power due to the rotation of the object is the time derivative of the rotational

energy:

         Pw =     dKT  =  d        1  If  2     +  1  Ir  2        = (If + Ir) .
                   dt     dt       2               2

    The angular velocity  of an object equals its ground speed vg divided by
its radius R, while its angular acceleration  is a/R.

    Substituting these into the above equation yields

                               Pw   =  (If      +  Ir  )  vg a  .
                                                          R2

If we solve for the power Pa that pushes the bike forward, then divide both sides
of (1) by vg, we obtain the applied force FA that pushes the bicycle forward:

                  Pf = Pa - Pw,           FA       =  Pa  -     (If    +  Ir  )   a  .
                                                      vg                         R2

The Drag Forces on the Bicycle

The drag force acting on an object moving through a ﬂuid is

                                  F   =      1  C  AV     2,
                                             2

where  is the density of the ﬂuid (air), A is the cross-sectional area of the object,
V is its velocity relative to the ﬂuid, and C is the coefﬁcient of drag that must
be determined experimentally.

    Air density, which can have a signiﬁcant effect on drag forces, depends
on temperature, pressure, and humidity. Pressure depends on altitude and
weather. Most baseball fans can attest to the signiﬁcant affects of air density on
drag forces: Baseballs carry much farther in Coors Field in Denver, Colorado,
because the high altitude leads to a low pressure, which means that the air
density is less as well.

    We consider all of these factors that affect air density in our model, via
calculations in the Appendix [EDITOR'S NOTE: We omit the appendix.]. The
230 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

most important aspect is that the air density is a function of the bike's elevation,
Sz. The bike's acceleration d2S/dt2 depends on the drag forces, which depend
on air density, which depends on the bike's position. This means that the
differential equation that we develop will be second-order, because the second
derivative of position depends on the position.

The Movement of the Air and Bicycle

    The air through which the bicycle moves is not stagnant--wind blowing
over the course has a signiﬁcant effect. We represent the wind as a vector ﬁeld
VA with a magnitude and direction that are uniform over the racecourse and
constant for the duration of the race.

    The cyclist's speed over the ground is vg; thus, the velocity is vgu, where u
is a unit vector in the bicycle's direction of movement. We now consider the
air's velocity relative to the bicycle instead of the bicycle's velocity relative to
the air, because this is an easier way of thinking about the problem and the
magnitudes of these two velocities are equal. Since the bike's velocity over the
ground is vgu, the air's velocity relative to the bike due to the bike's motion is
-vg u.

    The total velocity of the air moving relative to the bike is a function of two
motions: the air's movement relative to the ground in the form of wind, VA,
and the air's movement relative to the bike due to the bike's movement over the
ground, -vgu^, where we use the hat over u to denote that u is a unit vector. The
total speed is then the magnitude of the sum of these two velocities (Figure 1),

                                        vT = VA - vgu^ .

                                    Figure 1. Components of total air velocity.

    The yaw angle  is the angle between the bicycle's axis of movement and
the air direction, which we ﬁnd from the dot product, a∑b = a b cos , where
                              Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 231

 is the angle between the vectors. We have

                   -vgu^ ∑ (VA - vgu^) = vg VA - vgu^ cos ,

                                          = arccos -vgu^ ∑ (VA - vgu^ .
                                                            vg VA - vgu^

The bicycle's aerodynamic characteristics, and thus the drag forces, change
with . Furthermore, because the bicycle does not always head into the wind,
the overall drag force has components both normal and axial to the rider's path.
We assume that the normal component is negligible and consider only the axial
component (the component parallel to the cycle's axis of travel).

The Wheels

The axial drag force on the wheels largely depends on the yaw angle of

the air moving past them and must be calculated experimentally for different

types of wheels. For experimental results, we rely on Greenwell et al. [1995],

who used a wind tunnel to determine the axial drag coefﬁcient at different yaw

angles for various commercially available wheels.

For each type of wheel, we plotted axial drag coefﬁcient vs. yaw angle. From

the plots, we constructed a polynomial regression of axial drag coefﬁcients as

a function of the yaw angle. Greenwell et al. considered the reference cross-

sectional area of each wheel Sref to be the total side cross-sectional area of the

wheel,                        Sref = R2.

Thus, the effects of the cross-sectional area changing with yaw angle are in-
cluded in the axial drag coefﬁcient. Consequently, to use their results, we must
use the same reference area. The axial drag force on the front wheel is then

                              Ff = KW CF vT2 ,

where KW  =  1  Sref  and CF  is the axial drag coefﬁcient of the front wheel at
             2
yaw angle .

An interesting result of Greenwell et al. is that drag forces on the rear wheel

are generally reduced by about 25% due to aerodynamic effects of the seat tube.

This means that the axial drag force on the rear wheel is

                      FR = (0.75)KW CRvT2 ,

where CF is the axial drag coefﬁcient of the rear wheel at yaw angle .

The Bicycle Frame and Rider

    Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain data relating the drag coefﬁcient
of the rider and frame to the yaw angle, so we could consider only the effects
of the component of the wind that is parallel to the bicycle's velocity.
232 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                    Figure 2. Drag force on the frame and rider.

    In other words, for the drag force on the frame and rider, we consider only
the vector projection of the wind onto the rider's velocity (Figure 2). The total
air velocity is then the sum of this projection and the negative of the rider's
velocity. We ﬁnd the total drag force on the frame and rider to be

                        FB = KB (u^ ∑ VA)u^ - vgu^ 2,

where KB  =  1  CB  A,  A is the cross-sectional area  of bicycle frame  and  rider,
             2
and CB is the drag coefﬁcient of bicycle frame and cyclist.

Force of Gravity

    If the bicycle is on a hill, the component of gravitational force that is in the
direction of the motion is

                                         Fg = mT g sin ,

where mT is the total mass of the bicycle and rider, g is the acceleration of
gravity, and  is the angle at the bottom of the hill. But since the road grade is
G = sin , we haveFg = mT gG.

Force of Rolling Resistance

    Because the wheels have inﬂatable tires, the compression of the air within
the tires causes a resistance to their rolling. This rolling resistance is a reaction
to the rolling of the tires, which means that it will be 0 so long as the tires are

not rotating but proportional to the total weight of the bicycle and rider when
they are. Thus,

                        Frr =  CrrmT g,  if vg = 0;
                               0,        if vg = 0,

where Crr, the coefﬁcient of rolling resistance, is about 0.004 for most tires.
                                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 233

Summing the Forces

    We sum the forces that act in the model:

                       FA - FB - Ff - Fr - Fg - FRR = mT a,                                (2)

where

FA =  Pa  -  (If  +  Ir   )   a  (forward force that rider exerts),
      vg                     R2

FB = KB (u^ ∑ VA)u^ - vgu^) 2 (drag force on bike frame and rider),

FF = KW CF vT2 (drag force on front wheel),
FR = 0.75KW CRvT2 (drag force on rear wheel),

Fg = mT gG (force of gravity),

Frr = CrrmT g if vg = 0, 0 if vg = 0 (force of rolling resistance).

    The forward force of the rider depends on acceleration. Since we want to
have all the acceleration terms together, we ﬁrst group them:

    Pa  -  (If  +  Ir  )   a     - FB - Ff - Fr - Fg - FRR = mT a,
    vg                    R2

                             Pa  -  FB  -  Ff  -  Fr  -  Fg  -  FRR  =  a  mT  +  If + Ir  .
                             vg                                                     R2

Substituting the other forces into (2) , we obtain

Pa  -KB   (u^∑VA )u^-vg u^       2-KW CF vT2 -0.75KW CRvT2 -mT gG =            mT  +  If + Ir     a.
vg                                                                                      R2

Solving for a, we ﬁnd the second-order differential equation

    d2S      Pa   - KB        (u^ ∑ VA)u^ - vgu^ 2 - KW CF vT2 - 0.75KW CRvT2 - mT gG
    dt2      vg
a=        =                                                                                    .
                                                         If + Ir
                                                  mT  +    R2

Completing the Model

    This differential equation is too complicated to solve analytically, so we solve
it numerically using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta (RK4) approximation method
[Burden and Faires 1997]. This method is generally more accurate than other
numerical approximation methods such as Euler's method, especially at points
farther away from the start point.
234 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    To make the approximation, we ﬁrst deﬁne acceleration based on time t,
position (elevation Sz), and speed vg:

                                          a = a(t, Sz, vg)

    The RK4 method uses a weighted approximation of the acceleration at a
given time tk with speed vgk to determine the speed at some time tk+1 in the
future, where tk+1 = tk + h, with h the time-step size.

                                       1
                (vg)k+1 = (vg) + 6 h (WK1 + 2WK2 + 2WK3 + WK4) ,

where

WK1 = a(tk, vgk ),

WK2 = a  tk  +                    h  ,  vk  +  hWK1  ,
                                  2               2

WK3 = a  tk  +                    h  ,  vk  +  hWK2  ,
                                  2               2

WK4 = a(tk + h, vk + hWK3).

As with any numerical approximation method, we must know the initial speed

vg0 . Then, with the velocity computed at a given time, we calculate the position
of the bike at time tk+1 as

Sk+1 = Sk + h(vg)ku^

from the initial position of the bike S0. Again, because we consider only axial
forces acting on the bike and ignore turning, we can model only a bike moving
in a straight line; this means that u^, the unit vector in the direction of the velocity,
is constant.

Model Validation

    To validate our model, we developed a computer program to simulate
traversal of a course (see screen display in Figure 3). We inputted a map of the
2000 Olympic Games time-trial course [NBC Olympics 2000a]. The prevailing
wind speed and direction for Sydney on 27 September 2000 (the day of the
Olympic ﬁnals for the road race) was 10 m/s at 315 [Analytic Cycling 2001].
We assume that the winner would maintain an average power of 450 W.

    Using our model, we calculated that cyclists would complete 15 laps of the
15.3 km course in a time between 5 h 18 min and 5 h 47 min (depending on
which wheel is used). In Sydney that day, Jan Ullrich of Germany won the race
in a time of 5 h 29 min. As this result falls within the range of predicted values,
we believe that our model is relatively accurate.

    However, to test truly the validity of the model, we would need to ex-
periment with various riders and wheel types for which we know the drag
                                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 235

                                Figure 3. 2000 Olympic Games time-trial course.

coefﬁcient as a function of yaw angle. The riders could use an exercise bike to
determine their average power outputs. We would then have them traverse
a course with different wheel types. After inputting the course in our model,
we could compare the times that the model predicted with the experimental
results.

Model Application

Table Creation

    We construct tables for varying road grades and wind speeds. Since the
direction of the wind has an appreciable effect on wheel performance, we create
three tables: one for a headwind, one for a crosswind, and one for a tailwind.
We applied our model to a hill 1.0 km long, beginning with a velocity of 10 m/s.
The results in tabular form are in Table 1.

Table Analysis

    Our model accounts for many additional factors other than wind speed
and road grade; these contributions are lost if the results are pressed into table
236 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                                          Table 1.
                Preferred wheel type for a hill 1.0 km long and starting speed 10 m/s.
                                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 237

form. Additionally, cycling races generally do not consist of one large hill of a
uniform grade; there are typically many turns, hills, and valleys.

    As a result, we recommend against using the tables that we provide! Our
software implementation of the model allows the entry of all factors relating to
the course that affect wheel choice.

    Typically, course layout and elevation proﬁle are available well in advance
of a cycling race. We recommend that users of our software input the course
and run multiple scenarios based on varying wind speeds and directions.

Results and Conclusions

    We analyzed 7 different wheels: 5 spoked (Compagnolo, Conventional 36-
Spoke, HED 24-Spoke, Specialized Tri-Spoke, and FIR Tri-Spoke) and 2 disc
(HED Disc and ZIPP Disc). We chose these wheels because we could ﬁnd
data relating the drag coefﬁcients to the yaw angle of the air. After running
our model over varying courses and conditions, we came to some interesting
conclusions, which mesh well with what intuition would suggest.

Crosswinds

    In crosswinds, disc wheels dramatically outperform spoked wheels, since the drag
coefﬁcients for disc wheels decreases sharply as the yaw angle increases. As
yaw angle increases to around 20, drag coefﬁcients for disc wheels drop dra-
matically. For the HED Disc, the drag coefﬁcients actually become negative at
larger yaw angles, indicating that the wheel acts like a sail and helps propel
the cycle forward instead of slowing it down! The ZIPP Disc drag coefﬁcients
do not become negative but drop very close to zero at larger yaw angles. Con-
sequently, the difference in speed between discs and spokes in a crosswind is
signiﬁcant. If a course has a strong crosswind (greater than 20 mph), then a
disc wheel can make time differences on the order of 20% or more. However,
even in a light crosswind, the two disc wheels that we analyzed outperformed every
spoked wheel.

Direct Head and Tail Winds

    In direct head and tail winds, spoked wheels slightly outperform disc wheels, be-
cause both types have similar drag coefﬁcients at small yaw angles and spoked
wheels are lighter.

    Spoked wheels generally outperform disc wheels when going uphill in the
absence of wind, because they are lighter, whereas disk wheels outperform
spoked wheels when going downhill, because they are heavier. When there
is a head wind or a tail wind when going up a hill, spokes generally still
outperform discs; however, the introduction of any cross wind with a yaw
238 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

angle much greater than 15 or 20 causes the smaller disc drag coefﬁcients to
outweigh the mass differences. This means that disc wheels are more efﬁcient
than spoked wheels.

Long Races

    In long races, disc wheels generally outperform spoked wheels, because the smaller
drag forces on the disc have a more signiﬁcant effect on overall performance.
Generally, in a race of any length much over 5 km, discs are more efﬁcient,
because the wind acts on them for longer amounts of time than in short races,
which means that aerodynamic characteristics are more important than mass
differences.

Short Races

    In short races, where acceleration is more important, the spoked wheels,
with their smaller masses and moments of inertia, outperform the disc wheels.

Strengths of the Model

Robustness. We derive our model from basic physical relationships and limit
   our use of assumptions. In every case where an assumption is required, we
   substantiate it with evidence and reasoning that illustrates why the assump-
   tion is valid.

Grounded in theory and research. We constructed our model based on both
   theory (Newton's second law) and research (Greenwell et al. [1995]).

Ease of use. Although the physical concepts behind our model are relatively
   simple to understand, the mathematical derivations and calculations are
   difﬁcult to perform. We created a user-friendly computer program with a
   graphical interface that allows anyone with a basic knowledge of computers
   to input the required data. The program performs the mathematical calcu-
   lations and reports the preferred wheel choice, along with calculated stage
   times for the race.

Weaknesses of the Model

Representing the course. We represent the course as a sequence of points in
   three-dimensional space, with the path from point to point represented by a
   straight line. This is not an accurate representation of any course; the traver-
   sal of hills, valleys, and curves all create nonlinear movement. Accuracy
                                                      Selection of a Bicycle Wheel Type 239

   could be increased through a detailed entering of the course with a larger
   number of location nodes.

Approximation of wheel drag data. Greenwell et al. [1995] reported data for
   yaw angle 0 through 60 only in 7.5 increments. We developed interpo-
   lating polynomials through this range. We would conduct further tests at
   various yaw angles.

References

Analytic Cycling. 2001a. Wind on rider. http://www.analyticcycling.com/
    DiffEqWindCourse_Disc.html . Accessed 10 February 2001.

            . 2001b. Forces source input. http://www.analyticcycling.com/
    ForcesSource_Input.html . Accessed 10 February 2001.

Burden, Richard L., and Douglas Faires. 1997. Numerical Analysis. 6th ed. New
    York: Brooks/Cole.

Greenwell, D., N. Wood, E. Bridge, and R. Addy. 1995. Aerodynamic charac-
    teristics of low-drag bicycle wheels. Aeronautical Journal 99 (March 1995):
    109≠120.

Harris Cyclery. 2001. Bicycle glossary. http://www.sheldonbrown.com/gloss_
    ca-m.html#cadence . Accessed 10 February 2001.

NBC Olympics. 2000a. Individual time trial. http://sydney2000.nbcolympics.
    com/features/cy/2000/09/cy_feat_roadmap/cy_roadmap_01.html . Ac-
    cessed 11 February 2001.

            . 2000b. Men's road race results. http://sydney2000.nbcolympics.
    com/results/oly/cy/cym012.html?event=cym012100o.js . Accessed 11
    February 2001.

Palmer, Chad. 2001. Virtual temperature and humidity. USA Today. http://
    www.usatoday.com/weather/wvirtual.htm . Accessed 10 February 2001.

Seiler, Stephen. 2001. MAPP Questions and Answers Page. Masters Athlete
    Physiology and Performance. http://home.hia.no/~stephens/qanda.
    htm . Accessed 10 February 2001.
240 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
                                                                 A Systematic Technique 241

A Systematic Technique for
Optimal Bicycle Wheel Selection

Michael B. Flynn
Eamonn T. Long
William Whelan-Curtin

University College Cork
Cork, Ireland

Advisor: James Joseph Grannell

Introduction

    We present a theoretical investigation of the dynamics and aerodynamics
of a racing bicycle. We identify the dominant physical mechanisms and apply
Newtonian mechanics principles to obtain a differential equation that gives the
power output required of the rider. We then approximate the time-averaged
power difference between the two types of rear wheel. We develop an easy-
to-read, unambiguous, and comprehensive table that allows a person familiar
with track and wind conditions to select the correct wheel type. We apply this
table in the analysis of a time-trial stage of the Tour de France. We compare
and contrast our choice of wheel with that of the leading competitors, with
enlightening results.

    Our criterion on the wind speed and direction gives predictions that agree
with the exhaustive experimental data considered. We complement our crite-
rion with suggestions based on the experience of an extensive range of experi-
enced cyclists. We provide an informative critique of our model and suggest
innovative ways to enhance the wheel-choice criterion.

Assumptions

∑ The spoked wheel is the Campagnolo Vento 16 HPW clincher wheel, used
   by the ONCE cycling team [ONCE Cycling Team Website 2000]. Reported
   mass = 1.193 kg [Hi-Tech Bikes 2001].

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2000) 241≠252. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
242 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                     Table 1.
                        Model Inputs and Symbols.

s                  distance over which the average power is calculated
                   road grade
k                  initial speed of the rider before any incline
                   coefﬁcient of air drag for the bike and the rider frame
u                  cross-sectional area of bike and rider frame
                   air density
cr                 mass of spoked rear wheel
Ar                 mass of disc rear wheel
                   coefﬁcient of rolling resistance
m(spk)             9.81m/s2 acceleration due to gravity
m(sld)             drag coefﬁcient of front wheel
cr                 drag coefﬁcient of solid wheel
g                  drag coefﬁcient of spoked wheel
                   radius of rear wheel
cf w               constant of deceleration
crw (sld)          angle of wind with respect to direction of bike (degrees)
crw (spk)          speed of the wind with respect to the cyclist
rrw                moment of inertia of the rear wheel
µ                  moment of inertia of the front wheel
                   wind speed
                   kinematic viscosity of air

vf
Irw
If w
vw


∑ The density and pressure of the air across the bike are essentially constant.
  (See Appendix. [EDITOR'S NOTE: We omit the Appendix.])

∑ For most of the journey, the bike travels in a straight line (±10%). This is
  reasonable, since cyclists avoid turning as much as possible and they have
  a wide enough road to achieve a straight line.

∑ The solid wheel is taken to be the HED disc tubular freewheel, the solid
  wheel of choice in the Tour de France. Reported mass = 1.229 kg [Hi-Tech
  Bikes 2001].

∑ The drag coefﬁcients of both wheels are independent of the wind speed in the
  range of raceable weather conditions and vary signiﬁcantly with the relative
  direction of the wind [Flanagan 1996].

∑ The drag area of a typical crouched racer is 0.3 m2 [Compton 1998].

∑ The radius of the wheel is 35 cm [Compton 1998].

∑ The efﬁciency of the drive train is essentially 100%, reasonable for e¥lite racing
  bikes [Pivit 2001].

∑ The coefﬁcient of rolling resistance between road and wheel rubber is 0.007
  [Privit 2001].

∑ The moment of inertia of a bicycle wheel about an axis through its centre and

perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  wheel  is  I  =  1  mr2  ,  where  m  is  the  mass
                                                         9
                                                                 A Systematic Technique 243

   of the wheel and r is the radius. This agrees with empirical data [Compton
   1998].
∑ The deceleration to terminal speed on a uniform incline is constant to within
   ±2%.
∑ The terminal speed on a uniform incline is reached at 100 m up the incline.
∑ The deceleration of a rider on a slope is proportional to the gradient of the
   slope (given in the problem statement).
∑ The power is averaged over 100 m of acceleration, where the acceleration
   is that calculated in the Appendix. This power is used in determining the
   wind speed criterion for solid wheels.
∑ All of the drag due to the rider and bike frame is due to the rider cross-
   sectional area, since the area of the rider is much greater.
∑ The rolling resistance crrmg is the same for the solid wheel as for the spoked
   wheel. The tires surrounding the wheels are identical and the mass difference
   between the wheels is only about 0.1% of the overall mass of the bike plus
   rider.

The Wind Speed Criterion

    We have from Newton's Second Law that F = ma, where F is the force
acting the object, m is its mass, and a is its net acceleration. For the bicycle, the
force equation can be written as follows:

  Force applied by rider = Retarding Forces + ma + rotational acceleration,

where m is the mass of the rider-bike system. The retarding forces consist of
∑ the drag due to the bike frame and the rider,
∑ the drag due to the individual wheels,
∑ the friction due to the motion of the wheels in the air, and
∑ the rolling resistance of the wheels on the surface.
244 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

The formulas for these torques and forces are

    drag force of bike frame and rider            =  cw  Avf2  ,
          drag force due to front wheel                   2
           drag force due to rear wheel
                           frictional torque      =  cf  w  Avf2  ,
                                                            2

                                                  = crwAvf2 ,
                                                            2

                                                  = 0.6163/21/2r4,

mr  + mb  + mfw  +  If w  + mrw  +  Irw        a  =  Resultant Force.
                    r2              r2

    With this in mind, the power is averaged. The criterion on the wind speed
vw becomes:

    vw >  mrw(sld) - mrw(spk) +                      2 -  + ,
               (spk - sld)                        s       ss

where , , and  are as given in the Appendix. If the quantity on the left side
is not positive, then the solid wheel is always best. The quantity  is effectively
an aerodynamic term, whereas  and  can be thought of as representing the
acceleration, and time of acceleration respectively. Note that  is dependent on
the wind direction .

The Minimum Wind Speed Table

    Table 2 gives the wind speed below which the power for the spoked wheel
is less, for various rider speeds. A 0 means that for any nonzero wind speed,
the solid wheel requires less power;  means that the rider will not be able to
continue up the slope for 100 m.

Course Example

Time-trial course: Stage 1, Tour de France 2000 (Figure 1): A 16.5 km circuit
   starting at the Futuroscope building in Chassenuil-du-Poitou, France [Tour
   de France 2000].

Modeling the course: The course is modeled by a quadrilateral. This is a faith-
   ful representation of the course [CNN/Sports Illustrated Website 2000]. This
   course is predominantly level (Figure 2) save for a 1 km climb at a gradient
   of 3.7%. This climb is treated as the crucial feature of the time trial course,
   insofar as wheel choice is concerned.
                                       A Systematic Technique 245

                                           Table 2.
Wind speed (in m/s) below which the power for the spoked wheel is less.

                           a.
             Rider speed of 10 m/s.

Wind direction 180 173 165             150  135

Road Grade   16  0  0                    0     0
       0.00                              0     0
       0.01  23  0  0                    0     3
       0.02                              0     5
       0.03  29  1  0                    0     7
       0.04                              0     8
       0.05  34  3  0                    0   10
       0.06                              0   11
       0.07  39  4  0                    1   13
       0.08                              2   14
       0.09  43  6  1                    3   
       0.10
             48  7  3

             51  8  4

             55 10  5

             59 11  6

                    

                            b.
             Rider speed of 12.5 m/s.

Wind direction 180 173 165 150              135

Road Grade                                     0
                                               0
0.00         13  0  0                  0       0
                                               2
0.01         21  0  0                  0       3
                                               5
0.02         25  0  0                  0       7
                                               8
0.03         26  0  0                  0     10
                                             11
0.04         32  2  0                  0     12

0.05         36  3  0                  0

0.06         41  4  0                  1

0.07         45  5  0                  2

0.08         48  7  1                  3

0.09         52  8  2                  4

0.10         59  9  3                  5

                           c.
             Rider speed of 14 m/s.

Wind direction 180 173 165             150  135

Road Grade   12  0  0                    0     0
       0.00                              0     0
       0.01  19  0  0                    0     0
       0.02                              0     0
       0.03  25  0  0                    0     1
       0.04                              0     3
       0.05  30  0  0                    0     5
       0.06                              0     6
       0.07  35  0  0                    1     8
       0.08                              2     9
       0.09  39  1  0                    3   10
       0.10
             43  3  0

             47  4  0

             50  5  0

             54  6  0

             57  7  1
246 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Weather: The air temperature was about 20C. The wind was variable west to
   southwest, between 20 and 30 kph (5.6≠8.3 m/s) [Ofﬁcial Tour de France
   Website 2000].

                                                  Figure 1. The course.

    North points towards the top of the page. The climb is westward, meaning
that the riders faced the wind at an angle varying from 0 to 45 to the wind:
exactly the range of applicability of the table. The average speed of the top ten
ﬁnishers was about 14 m/s. We analyse the climb from the perspective of a
rider who begins the climb at that speed and whose speed levels off after 100 m
of the climb. Knowing the speed of the rider to be 14 m/s and the gradient
of the slope to be approximately 4%, we can apply Table 2c. The minimum
wind speed in the table is 1.44 m/s (assuming that the wind is at an angle to
the direction of motion). On the basis of the climb alone, the solid wheel is
the better choice. In fact, assuming that the wind is at an angle to the rider for
most of the journey (wind that "follows" a cyclist around is unlikely), the solid
wheel is better at all nonzero wind speeds (assuming level terrain and rider
speed of 14 m/s).

    The recommended wheel for this race is therefore the solid wheel. In this
time trial, U.S. Postal Team and the Spanish ONCE Team used a solid rear
wheel and a tri-spoke front wheel (a more aerodynamically efﬁcient version
                                   A Systematic Technique 247

       Figure 2. Proﬁle of the course.

of the standard spoked wheel). The two teams had ﬁve riders in the top ten
[Ofﬁcial Tour de France Website 2000; Pediana 2000].

The Adequacy of the Table

Comparing Its Predictions with Experimental Data

    On an indoor circuit, the gradient and the wind can be considered to be
zero. The corresponding entries in Table 2, for a direct headwind (180) at zero
gradient, are nonzero, indicating that spoked wheels are better. This prediction
is borne out by the empirical results on an indoor circuit [Beer 1999] (Table 3).

                                 Table 3.
       Measurements made on a 1-km indoor circuit.

Watts  Spoked Rear Wheel Solid Rear Wheel

100 time (min:sec) 2:22.58              2:26.78
          speed (ms-1)
                            6.97                    6.77

200 time (min:sec) 1:51.75              1:52.55
          speed (ms-1)
                            8.90                    8.83

300 time (min:sec) 1:36.98              1:39.70
          speed (ms-1)
                            10.25                   9.97

The times correspond to seven laps of 147 m. The test cyclist rode at power
outputs of 100 W, 200 W, and 300 W. The tests were repeated with no more
than a 2% time variation; the spoked rear wheel has the better performance by
a margin greater than the experimental error.

    However, for a road circuit (where one would expect variable and nonzero
wind velocities), Table 2 predicts that for nonzero cross winds and slopes of a
gradient less than 5%, the solid wheel is best, based on minimising aerodynamic
losses. Thus, if the solid wheel is the right choice for a particular cyclist speed,
248 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

then the solid wheel choice is valid for all greater cyclist speeds, given the same
atmospheric conditions. Experimental data in Table 4 back up this claim.

                                Table 4.
       Measurements made on a 7.2-km road circuit.

Watts  Spoked Rear Wheel Solid Rear Wheel

200 time (min:sec) 15:22                13:53
          speed (ms-1)
                                  7.81              8.63

    The circuit consisted of a 7.2-km looped course of rolling hills (gradient
< 5%) with varying wind conditions (nonzero wind speeds, unlike the indoor
track). The power output of the cyclist was approximately 200 W. The tests
were repeated with no more than a 2.3% time variation. For the road circuit, the
solid rear wheel is the better choice (again by more than the experimental error).
According to the appropriate table, the solid rear wheel is the more efﬁcient
for most of the conditions that were encountered. Thus, the predictions of the
model are once more conﬁrmed.

Additional Factors Not Considered by the Table

Stability of the bike: Stability is a major factor in cycling. A cyclist wants to
   concentrate on putting the maximum possible power through the pedals. If
   the bicycle is unstable, the jerking of the handlebars in response to sudden
   gusts of wind will be very disruptive. In general, bicycles with standard
   spoked wheels front and rear are the least affected by changing crosswinds,
   but bikes with solid wheels are fastest. A solid front wheel can increase the
   rider's pedaling wattage by 20% to 30%, but it removes all the bicycle's self-
   centering effects, making for a difﬁcult ride. A solid rear wheel has similar
   but milder effects [Cobb 2000].

Turning radius: This factor is important if the course contains many turns or
   if maneuvering in response to other riders is necessary. A greater turning
   radius loses time at each turn, where more maneuverable riders may over-
   take.

Rider comfort: The solid wheel also creates the problem of rider comfort. As it
   has no spokes, it cannot ﬂex to absorb any shocks due to irregularities of the
   road surface. Towards the end of a long race, a rider's concentration may
   be impaired due to the resulting discomfort, causing a drop in performance
   [Bicycle Encyclopedia 2000].

    Very few cyclists ride with two solid wheels (1 out of 177 in the time trial that
we studied), despite the aerodynamic superiority--steering problems negate
the gain. Similarly, we have shown the superiority of the solid rear wheel in
race conditions, yet in the long-distance (150+ km) stages of the Tour de France,
                                                                 A Systematic Technique 249

all riders use spoked wheels: Solid wheels have insufﬁcient maneuverability
and steering problems cause mental fatigue near the end of the stage.

    Thus, the directeur sportif should consider the length of the race, the wind
conditions, and the quality of the road surface in making the decision.

Error Analysis

    The error was determined by calculating the differential.
    The wind direction may vary considerably over a given course due to local
effects (e.g., buildings, trees). We chose an error of 10% for cfw() and crw().
    Air density can usually be determined to a high accuracy but varies by
location. Therefore, we chose a 1% error, since the necessary equipment is
unlikely to be available to the directeur sportif at the time of the race.
    Using a wind tunnel, drag coefﬁcients can be determined to a very high pre-
cision (to within 0.02kg); but variables such as pedaling speed, wheel rotation,
and rider posture introduce inaccuracies that cannot be easily determined. The
main difﬁculty is that the ﬂowﬁeld about a rider in a wind tunnel is not ergodic,
primarily as a result of airﬂow irregularities caused by pedaling. Therefore,
we chose an error of 3% for cr [Flanagan 1996].
    For each rider/bicycle combination, the directeur sportif should determine
the appropriate masses and dimensions. We assume that they can be deter-
mined to a high degree of accuracy ( 0.1%) with the exception of the rider's
cross section, in which we take an error of 2%. From error analysis in the
Appendix, we ﬁnd

                                              vw = 16%.
                                             vw

Strengths and Weaknesses

    Our model clearly and concisely states which wheel should be used under
the various conditions. The model is based on equations that are sufﬁciently
versatile so that further factors pertaining to a particular situation may be in-
cluded as required, without any need to construct new equations.

    We could not verify the model experimentally under conditions of the high
power output of e¥lite cyclists. However, in data available for various lesser
power outputs, we could not discern any noticeable trends in time differential
between the different wheels with respect to increasing power.

    Our model does not contain a quantitative analysis of the wind speeds
at which the solid wheel is unacceptably unstable. However, this question
depends largely on the abilities and preferences of each individual rider and
requires detailed local information about road conditions and wind variability.

    No data were available regarding the coefﬁcients of drag in a tail wind.
However, since the cyclist ( 15 m/s) in general travels faster than the wind
250 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

(race conditions < 10 m/s), only the crosswind effects are important, and these
are adequately handled in the tables.

    The major weakness of the model is assuming that the rider's speed does
not differ much from the rider's average speed over the duration of the race.
Moreover, we could ﬁnd no evidence to support the problem's assumption that
a rider reaches terminal velocity after 100 m of a slope.

Conclusion

∑ When there is a head wind, the spoked wheel is better. If the course is ﬂat,
   the solid wheel is better for strong winds; however, the wind (particularly if
   gusting) may cause instability problems.

∑ When the wind is not weak (> 5 m/s) and strikes the wheel at an angle,
   the solid wheel is nearly always better. Even a small component of wind
   perpendicular to the rider direction makes the solid wheel the better choice.

∑ If the circuit has many tight turns or involves riding in close company with
   other cyclists, the solid wheel's lack of maneuverability dictates the spoked
   wheel; otherwise, the risk of an accident and injury is unacceptable.

∑ The region of superiority of the solid wheel increases with rider speed. Since
   the power required to overcome air resistance goes as the cube of the velocity,
   the aerodynamic savings of the solid wheel become more important with
   higher speed.

References

Beer, Joe. 1999. Cycling Plus (January 1999) 19≠22.Is a racing recumbent really
    faster than an aero trial bike or a quality road bike? http://http://www.
    necj.nj.nec.com/homepages/sandiway/bike/festina/cplus.html .

The Bicycle Encyclopedia. 2001. http://my.voyager.net/older/bcwebsite/
    test/w/wheelset.htm .

Chow, Chuen-Yen. 1979. An Introduction to Computational Fluid Mechanics. New
    York: Wiley.

CNN/Sports Illustrated Website. 2001. http://sportsillustrated.cnn.
    com/cycling/2000/tour_de_france/stages/1/ .

Coast, J.R. 1996. What determines the optimal cadence? Cycling Science (Spring
    1996) http://www.bsn.com/cycling/articles/ .

Cobb, John. 2000. Steering stability explained. http://www.bicyclesports.
    com/technical/aerodynamics .
                                                                 A Systematic Technique 251

Cochran, W.G. 1934. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 30: 365ff.

Compton, Tom. 1998. Performance and wheel concepts.
    http://www.analyticcycling.com .

Flanagan, Michael J. 1996. Considerations for data quality and uncertainty in
    testing of bicycle aerodynamics. Cycling Science (Fall 1996).
    http://www.bsn.com/cycling/articles .

Douglas, J.F. 1975. Solutions of Problems in Fluid Mechanics. Bath, England:
    Pitman Press.

            , J.M. Gasiorek, and J.A. Swafﬁeld. 1979. Fluid Mechanics. Bath,
    England: Pitman Press.

Giant Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 2001. http://www.giant-bicycle.com .

Hi-Tech Bikes. 2001. http://www.hi-techbikes.com/ .

Hull, Wang, and Moore. 1996. An empiricalmodel for determining the radial
    force-deﬂection behavior of off-road bicycle tires. Cycling Science (Spring
    1996). http://www.bsn.com/cycling/articles/ .

The K-8 Aeronautics Internet Textbook. 2001. http://wings.ucdavis.edu/
    books/sports/instructor/bicycling .

von Ka¥rma¥n, Th. 1921. U® ber laminare und turbulente Reibung. Zeitschrift fu® r
    angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik 1: 245ff.

Kaufman, W. 1963. Fluid Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Kreyszig, Erwin. 1999. Advanced Engineering Mathematics. 8th Edition. New
    York: Wiley.

The Ofﬁcial Tour de France Website. 2000. http://www.letour.com .

The ONCE Cycling Team Website. 2000. http://oncedb.deutsche-bank.es/ .

Pediana, Paul. 2000. Aerowheels. http://www.diablocyclists/paul06001.
    htm .

Pivit, Rainer. 1990. Bicycles and aerodynamics. Radfahren 21: 40≠44.
    http://www.lustaufzukunft.de/pivit/aero/formel.htm .

Rinard, Damon. Bicycle Tech Site. http://www.damonrinard.com .

Shimano American Corporation 2001. http://www.shimano.com

Tour de France 2000. 2000. The Irish Times Website (June 2000).
    http://www.ireland.com/sports/tdt/stages .
252 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Dr. Ann Watkins, President of the Mathematical Association of America, congratulating MAA
Winners Eamonn Long, Michael Flynn, and William Whelan-Curtin, after they presented their
model at MathFest in Madison, WI, in August. [Photo courtesy of Ruth Favro.]
                                                           Author-Judge's Commentary 253

Author-Judge's Commentary:
The Outstanding Bicycle Wheel
Papers

Kelly Black

Visiting Associate Professor
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Utah State University
Logan, UT 84341
kelly.black@unh.edu

Introduction: The Problem

    Professional bicycle racers have a wide variety of wheel types available to
them. The types of wheels range from the familiar spoked wheels, to wheels
with three or four blades, to solid wheels. The spoked wheels have the lowest
mass but have the highest friction forces due to interactions with air. The solid
wheels have the most mass but have the lowest friction forces. The question
posed was to demonstrate a method to determine what kind of wheel to use
for a given race course.

    The problem focused on the two most basic types of wheels, the spoked
wheel and the solid wheel. Three tasks were given:
∑ Find the wind speeds for which one wheel has an advantage over the other

   for particular inclines.
∑ Demonstrate how to use the information in the ﬁrst task to determine which

   wheel to use for a speciﬁc course.
∑ Evaluate whether the information provided in the ﬁrst task achieved the

   overall goal.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2000) 253≠256. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
254 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

General Remarks on the Solution Papers

    As is the case each year, many ﬁne papers were submitted. The papers were
judged on both their technical merit and on their presentation. The submissions
in which both aspects were superior received the most attention. The problem
required that many assumptions had to be made; because of the severe time
restrictions, it was extremely important to be able to choose assumptions that
did not make the problem too simple but still relevant.

    For example, a number of submissions concentrated on the yaw angle, the
angle that the wind makes with respect to the direction of movement of the
bicycle. While some of these submissions were quite good, it appeared that
others spent so much time trying to ﬁgure out how to deal with this complicated
aspect that sufﬁcient progress was not made with respect to the other parts of
the problem. Moreover, it was often difﬁcult to read and interpret the resulting
descriptions of the teams' efforts.

    While the assumptions were important, it was also important in develop-
ing a mathematical model for this problem to stay consistent with the basic
deﬁnitions of mechanics. There were a number of entries in which Newton's
Second Law, the torque equations, or the power was not correctly identiﬁed.
There was also some confusion about units. Such difﬁculties represented a key
division between the lower and higher rankings.

Approaches

    Overall, there were two different approaches:

∑ The ﬁrst approach focused on the mechanics of a bicycle moving on an
   incline. The forces acting on the bicycle and rider were used to ﬁnd the
   equations of motion from Newton's Second Law and the torque equations.
   The equations could then be used to isolate the force acting to move the
   bicycle forward.

        The main difﬁculty with this approach was in isolating and identify-
        ing the relevant force based on the equations from Newton's Second
        Law and the corresponding torque equations. In many cases, it was
        difﬁcult to identify exactly how the system of equations was ma-
        nipulated and how the equations were found. The submissions in
        this category that were highly rated did an excellent job of display-
        ing and referring to the free-body diagrams, as well as discussing
        how the relevant force was isolated by manipulating the system of
        equations.

∑ The second approach focussed on the aerodynamic forces acting on the
   wheels, then calculated the power to move the wheels forward. For the
   spoked wheel, the total force acting on the wheel was found by adding the
                                                           Author-Judge's Commentary 255

   effects on each spoke (along its entire length) with its respective orientations.
   For the solid wheel, the forces acting on the whole wheel were found with
   respect to the wind yaw angle.

        This second approach turned out to be a difﬁcult one. In some cases,
        it was hard for the judges to identify the approach and what assump-
        tions were being made. The submissions in this category were also
        more likely to concentrate on the yaw angle and its associated com-
        plications. The teams that carefully structured their approach and
        clearly identiﬁed each step stood out.

    For either approach, there were different assumptions that could be made
about the motion of the bicycle and rider. The most common approach was to
make some assumption about either the acceleration or the steady-state velocity
as the bike and rider moved along the hill. The second most common assump-
tion was to assume that the rider provided a constant power output and then
work backwards to isolate the forces acting on the wheels. For the most part,
the judges did not question the technical merits of these kinds of assumptions.
The judges concentrated instead on whether or not the submissions presented
a clear and consistent case based on the given assumptions.

Fulﬁlment of the Tasks

    There were many ﬁne entries in which the ﬁrst task (provide a table) was
addressed. The ﬁrst task was the most speciﬁc and straightforward part of the
problem. The factor that set the entries apart was in how the two remaining
tasks (use the table in a time trial, determine if the table is adequate) were
addressed and presented. The majority of submissions discussed the second
task by dividing the race course into discrete pieces; the total power could then
be found by adding up the power requirements over each piece. This part of
the submissions often seemed to have received the least amount of attention
by the different teams and was often the hardest part to read and interpret.

    The analysis and qualitative comparisons within each submission were cru-
cial in determining how a team's efforts were ranked. Many teams provided an
adequate formulation for the ﬁrst task in the problem but addressed the other
tasks in a superﬁcial manner. The real opportunity to express a deeper under-
standing of the problem and show some creativity lay in how the remaining
aspects of the problem were approached.

    The entries that most impressed the judges went further in their analysis. In
particular, a small number of entries approached the third task by noting that
the real goal was to minimize the time spent on a particular race course. By as-
suming that the rider would expend a constant power output, the equations of
motions from Newton's Second Law could then be found. The position of the
rider on the course at any given time could then be approximated through a nu-
merical integration of the resulting system of equations. For a given racecourse,
256 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

the total time on the course could be found for different wheel conﬁgurations.
A simple comparison of total times determined which wheel to use for the
course.

    The submissions that went beyond the stated problem and stayed true to
the original goal received the most attention from the judges. Such papers
showed creative and original thought, and they truly stood apart from the rest.
Moreover, they showed the deepest understanding of the task at hand.

About the Author

    Kelly Black is visiting Utah State University and is on sabbatical leave from
the University of New Hampshire. He received his undergraduate degree in
Mathematics and Computer Science from Rose-Hulman Institute of Technol-
ogy and his Master's and Ph.D. from the Applied Mathematics program at
Brown University. His research is in scientiﬁc computing and has interests in
computational ﬂuid dynamics, laser simulations, and mathematical biology.
                                                                         Project H.E.R.O. 257

Project H.E.R.O.:
Hurricane Evacuation Route
Optimization

Nathan Gossett
Barbara Hess
Michael Page

Bethel College
St. Paul, MN

Advisor: William M. Kinney

Introduction

    Through modeling and computer simulation, we established an evacuation
plan for the coastal region of South Carolina in the event of an evacuation order.

    We derive nine evacuation routes running from the coastal region inland.
Based on geography, counties are given access to appropriate routes. Com-
bining ﬂow theory with geographic, demographic, and time constraints, we
formulate a maximum ﬂow problem. Using linear optimization, we ﬁnd a fea-
sible solution. This solution serves as a basis for our evacuation model. The
validity of the model is conﬁrmed through computer simulation.

    A total evacuation (1.1 million people) in 24 to 26 hours is possible only if
all trafﬁc is reversed on the nine evacuation routes.

Terms and Deﬁnitions

Flow F : the number of cars that pass a given point per unit time (cars per hour
   per lane, unless otherwise speciﬁed).

Speed s: the rate of movement of a single car (mph, unless otherwise speciﬁed).

Density k: the number of cars per unit length of roadway (cars per mile per
   lane, unless otherwise speciﬁed).

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 257≠269. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
258 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Headway distance hd: the space between the back of the leading car and the
   front of the immediately trailing car (ft). (Note: This is not a standard deﬁ-
   nition of headway distance.)

Headway time ht: the time required to travel headway distance.

Car Length C: length from front bumper to rear bumper of a single car (feet).

Goals

    Our ﬁrst priority is to maximize the number of people who reach safety;
in terms of our model, we must maximize the ﬂow of the entire system. A
secondary goal is to minimize the total travel time for evacuees; this means
that we must maximize speed. As we establish, these goals are one and the
same.

Assumptions

∑ Vehicles hold 2 people on average. This seems reasonable, based on the
   percentage of the population who would be unable to drive themselves and
   those who would carpool.

∑ Vehicles average 17 ft in length. This is based on a generous average fol-
   lowing a quick survey of car manufacturers' Web sites.

∑ Vehicles have an average headway time of 3 s. This is based on numbers
   for driver reaction time, found in various driving manuals.

∑ 50 mph is a safe driving speed.

∑ Merging of trafﬁc does not signiﬁcantly affect our model. See the Ap-
   pendix for justiﬁcation.

∑ Highways 26, 76/328, and 501 are 4-lane. [Rand McNally 1998]

∑ Safety is deﬁned as 50 mi from the nearest coastal point. Counties that lie
   beyond this point will not be evacuated [SCAN21 2001].

∑ Only the following counties need to be evacuated: Allendale, Beaufort,
   Berkeley, Charleston, Colleton, Dorchester, Georgetown, Hampton, Horry,
   Jasper, Marion, Williamsburg, and a minimal part of Florence County (based
   on the previous assumption).

∑ Myrtle Beach will not be at its full tourist population during a hurricane
   warning. This seems reasonable because tourists do not like imminent bad
   weather.
                                                  Project H.E.R.O. 259

∑ The evacuation order will be given at least 24 to 26 h prior to the arrival of
  a hurricane. This is based on the timeline of the 1999 evacuation [Intergraph
  2001].

∑ Boats, trailers, and other large vehicles will be limited from entering the
  main evacuation routes. Being able to evacuate people should have a higher
  priority than evacuating property.

∑ If we can get everyone on a road within 24 h and keep trafﬁc moving at
  a reasonable speed, everyone should be at a safe zone within 25 to 26 h.
  This is based on our assumption of what a safe zone is and our assumption
  of average speed.

Developing the Model

Abstracted Flow Modeling

    Upon inspecting the evacuation route map, we decided that there are only
nine evacuation routes. There appear to be more, but many are interconnected
and in fact merge at some point. By identifying all bottlenecks, we separated
out the discrete paths.

    Using this nine-path map in combination with the county map, we con-
structed an abstracted ﬂow model with nodes for each county, merge point,
and destination, so as to translate our model into a form for computer use.

A Brief Discussion of Flow

    The ﬂow F is equal the product of density and speed: F = ks [Winston
1994]. We can ﬁnd the density k of cars per mile by dividing 1 mi = 5,280 ft by
the sum C + hd, the length of a car plus headway distance (in ft), so

                      F  =  ks  =  5280s
                                   C + hd .

Using the fact that headway distance hd is speed s (ft/s) times headway time

ht (sec), we have         5280s       5280
                         C + sht
                   F  =            =  C        .
                                      s  + ht

    Increasing s increases F . This result is exciting, because it shows that max-
imizing ﬂow is the same as maximizing speed. The graph of F versus s gives
even more insight (Figure 1). Increases in speed past a certain point beneﬁt F
less and less. So we might sacriﬁce parts of our model to increase low speeds
but not necessarily to increase high speeds.
260 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    1000
     800
     600
     400
     200

          20                      40              60  80

          Figure 1. Flow vs. speed.

    According to our assumptions, we have C = 17 ft and ht = 3 sec, and
converting to units of miles and hours, we get

             F  =                 1         ,

                     17           +     1
                   5280s              1200

or

          s  =   17   ∑            1200F       .          (1)
                5280              1200 - F

At our assumed maximum safe speed of s = 50 mph, we have F = 1114 cars/h.

Determining Bounds

    We combined our knowledge of county populations with the 24-h deadline
and generated a minimum output ﬂow for each county. We also determined
the maximum ﬂow for each node-to-node segment, based on the number of
lanes. It would be unrealistic to assume that each segment would reach optimal
ﬂow, so we set maximum ﬂow at 90% of optimal ﬂow. This reduction in ﬂow
is meant to cover problems that arise from accidents, slow drivers, less than
ideal merging conditions, or other unexpected road conditions. Putting F =
0.9Fopt = (0.9)(1113.92) into (1), we ﬁnd s  19.6 mph. We decided that this is
an acceptable minimal speed.

Finding a Feasible Solution

    We used the linear optimizing program LINDO to ﬁnd a feasible solution;
the solution takes 26 h. Since this scenario does not take into account geograph-
ical convenience, we did some minor hand-tweaking. The ﬁnal product is in
the Appendix.
                                                                         Project H.E.R.O. 261

The Simulation

    To conﬁrm the feasibility of our model, we conducted a computer simula-
tion using Arena simulation software. The simulation encompassed 24 h of
trafﬁc ﬂow on the nine evacuation routes assuming 90% ﬂow efﬁciency. The
model assumed that there was an unlimited number of vehicles ready to enter
the simulation in all counties. The time headway between entering vehicles
was considered to be normally distributed with a mean of 3 s and a standard
deviation of 1 s. The simulation veriﬁed our model.

Implementation Requirements

    For optimal performance of our model:

∑ Evacuees must follow the evacuation routes. The State of South Carolina
   should notify speciﬁc communities or households which route to take.

∑ Flow must be monitored on all evacuation routes; this requires metering
   entry of evacuees onto the evacuation routes. Allowing vehicles to enter an
   evacuation route too quickly may result in congestion at bottlenecks.

∑ Advance notiﬁcation that there will be ticketing by photograph could en-
   force the restriction on towing boats and trailers, which might otherwise be
   ignored.

Applying the Model

Requirement 1

    If an evacuation order included both Charleston and Dorchester counties
24 h prior to the predicted arrival of a hurricane, it would be necessary to
reverse all four lanes of I-26 to ensure the evacuation of the entire population of
the two counties. In our simulation runs, all of the exit routes from Charleston
and Dorchester ran at full capacity (all lanes reversed, 90% of maximum ﬂow)
for 24 h to evacuate the counties completely. If the lanes are not reversed, it is
doubtful that the two counties could evacuate in a timely fashion.

Requirement 2

    To optimize use of the available bandwidth while ensuring that the entire
population is displaced inland within 24 h, we opted for a simultaneous evac-
uation strategy: All counties begin evacuation at the same time.

    Since hurricanes typically arrive in South Carolina moving northward, a
staggering strategy would evacuate southernmost counties ﬁrst. Our model
262 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

has discrete evacuation routes servicing each part of the coastline, so it is not
necessary to stagger evacuation. For example, since Beaufort County, which
would be among the ﬁrst counties to be hit in the case of a hurricane, and
Horry County, which would be hit signiﬁcantly later, do not depend on the
same evacuation route, nothing is gained by delaying the evacuation of Horry
County until Beaufort County has cleared out.

Requirement 3

    To evacuate the entire coastal region within 24 h, we found it necessary
to turn around trafﬁc on all designated evacuation routes. With greater time
allowance, not all routes would need to be turned around.

Requirement 4

    Our model directs approximately 480,000 evacuees to Columbia. This surge
entering a city of 500,000 would undoubtedly disrupt trafﬁc ﬂow. While three
major interstates head farther inland from Columbia and could easily accom-
modate the trafﬁc from the coast, the extreme congestion within the city would
disrupt the ﬂow coming into Columbia from the coast. It would be best to set
up temporary shelters around the outskirts of Columbia (and at other destina-
tion sites) to avoid having too many people vying for space within Columbia
itself.

Requirement 5

    Because heavy vehicles take up more road space and generally require a
greater headway time, they adversely affect our model. Heavy vehicles are
allowable if they are the only available means of transportation, as may be the
case for tourists in recreational vehicles. Boats and trailers are strictly forbidden
on the evacuation routes. A rule of one car per household can be announced, but
the model can probably handle up to two cars per household. Our assumption
of two people per car can still hold up, given the number of people who are
unable to drive themselves to safety.

Requirement 6

    With the ﬂow and time constraints deﬁned within our model, the entrance
of large numbers of additional evacuees onto the designated evacuation routes
from I-95 would cause serious disruptions. The trafﬁc on I-95 coming from
Georgia and Florida may turn west onto any nonevacuation roadway. Ideally,
better evacuation routes could be established within Georgia and Florida to
minimize their evacuees entering South Carolina.
                                                                         Project H.E.R.O. 263

Limitations

    Time forced us to simplify our model. Here are extensions that we would
have liked to include:

Factor in the "ﬁrst-hour" effect. The western counties could potentially have
   full use of the evacuation routes for a limited time at the very beginning of
   the evacuation. The population of the eastern counties would take time to
   reach the western counties; but once they did, both groups would have to
   share the route.

Do more work with the impact of large vehicles.

Explore headway time in greater detail. We know that headway time is not
   dependent on speed in an ideal world, but does human psychology make
   headway time dependent on speed? Also, although we assume that all
   vehicles exhibit the same stopping pattern, we know that car size and brake
   condition have an effect. We would like to ﬁnd a more accurate concept of
   headway time.

Inspect all nine routes on-site. We assume that any road listed by the SCDOT
   as a hurricane evacuation route is well maintained and appropriate for that
   use, and that these are the only appropriate routes.

Expand the complexity of our model. We kept the number of paths to a man-
   ageable level, but it would be nice to factor in the smaller routes.

Develop mechanisms to implement our model. This would involve planning
   out a block-by-block time-table, metering techniques, merging techniques,
   trafﬁc reversal techniques, and large-vehicle restriction techniques.

Add accidents, breakdowns, and other problems to the model speciﬁcally, rather
   than just lumping them into "efﬁciency."

Study the potential costs of complete trafﬁc reversal.

Study the population ﬂuctuations of Myrtle Beach, so that we would know
   how many tourists to expect in the event of a hurricane.
264 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Authorities Fear Floyd Repeat,
Enlist Help of Undergraduates

    Arden Hills, MN, Feb. 12--            than 12 counties.
Responding to complaints over the             Such an evacuation would involve
disorder of South Carolina's 1999
coastal evacuation in preparation for     all people in the area being divided
Hurricane Floyd, authorities enlisted     among 9 separate evacuation routes
the aid of three undergraduates from      and released in a timed fashion. Using
Bethel College. The task set before       the timings and routings suggested by
the three young mathematicians was        the Bethel team, the entire coast could
to plan an orderly and timely evacua-     be evacuated within a reasonable time
tion of South Carolina's coastal region.  and the travel time for individual ve-
                                          hicles could be kept to a minimum.
    A denial of funding for travel ex-
penses prevented the students from            Compared to the 1999 evacua-
making an on-site inspection, but they    tion, when fewer than 800,000 people
managed to get a feel for the territory   were evacuated, the Bethel model can
based on maps and census reports.         evacuate more than 1.1 million peo-
Using a technique they dubbed "Ab-        ple. Much of this increase can be at-
stracted Flow Modeling," the team         tributed to grid-lock prevention, lane-
constructed several computer mod-         doubling, and access restriction to the
els of what a full coastal evacuation     main highways.
would involve. Using all the tools
available to them and a little human in-      Concerned citizens should be on
tuition, the trio created a 26-hour sce-  the lookout for announcements con-
nario for the full evacuation of more     cerning route assignments and depar-
                                          ture timings for their neighborhoods.

-- Nathan Gossett, Barbara Hess, and Michael Page in Arden Hills, MN
                                             Project H.E.R.O. 265

Appendix

Abstracted Flow Model

    We created the ﬂow model in Figure A1 to represent what we perceived as
9 routes from the coast of South Carolina to the interior of the state. Rectangles
represent locations and ovals represent junctions. The arrows represent ﬂow
direction. The ﬂow assigned to various segments can be found in Table A1.

                           Table A1.
            Flow rates by route and county.

County        Population Junction            Flow

              (thousands)                    (cars/min)

Jasper        17           1a                5.9

Hampton       19           1b                6.6

Allendale     11           1c                3.8

Beaufort      113          1a                17.1

                           2a                22

Colleton      38           2a                4.4

                           2b                4.4

                           3                 4.4

Charleston    320          2b                2.6

                           3                 29

                           4                 17.6

                           26                51

                           5                 5.5

                           6a                5.5

Dorchester    91           4                 15.8

                           26                15.8

Berkeley      142          5                 27.4

                           6a                21.4

Georgetown    55           6a                3

                           6b                16.1

Williamsburg  37           6a                3.5

                           6b                9.3

Florence      125          6b                4

                           7b                4

Horry         179          6b                4

                           7                 51

                           8                 33.4

Marion        34           7b                5.9

                           7a                5.9

Merge Considerations

    We do not want congestion at merges, so we maintain a constant trafﬁc
density in a "merge zone." Let A and B be the pre-merge ﬂows and C be the
post-merge outﬂow. Then we must have C = A + B to avoid congestion.
266 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                        Figure A1. Abstracted ﬂow model.
                                                                       Project H.E.R.O. 267

    We must regulate the pre-merge ﬂows to prevent congestion and allow for
maximum post-merge ﬂow.

    If the density of merging trafﬁc is large enough, we set aside one or two
lanes for merging for about a mile prior to the merge point. We investigate
whether this is possible without lowering the pre-merge ﬂows A and B, and
when this strategy is physically possible and beneﬁcial.

    Does shifting main-road trafﬁc left to open a merge lane(s) increase the main
road's ﬂow (before merge trafﬁc is added) and thus increase its contribution to
post-merge ﬂow? If so, then the post-merge ﬂow would be

                      (A + increase) + B = (C + increase).

But we ﬁxed C = A + B as the maximum ﬂow, so A or B or both must decrease.
Is this reduction really a concern?

    Recall that F = ks, where F is ﬂow, k is density, and s is speed. Let N be
the number of cars on a one-mile stretch and L be the number of lanes in the
direction of concern. The total ﬂow of the road is the product of the lane ﬂow
and the number of lanes:

                                 Lks = L(N/L)s = N s.

To  shift  one  lane  left,  we  must  move    N/L    vehicles  to  L  -  1  lanes,  adding  N/L
                                                                                             L-1
vehicles to each non-merge lane, thus giving a new lane population of

                                 N  +  N/L      =  N     ∑    L
                                 L     L-1         L        L - 1.

So the new ﬂow is

                             (L - 1)   N     ∑    L         s = N s.
                                       L        L-1

No change! We do not have to reduce pre-merge ﬂows to add a merge lane
(assuming that the merge lane modiﬁcation is physically possible). The same
argument conﬁrms that pre-merging works for shifting two lanes.

    When are these shifts physically possible? Let m = N/L, and let q be a
lane's carrying capacity per mile, which is a function of s for ﬁxed ht. Then for
clearing one merge lane to be physically possible, we need

                                         m  1      q  -  m.
                                       L-

If two lanes need to be shifted left, the same process yields the requirement

                                        2m       (q   -  m).
                                       L-2

Moving everything to the right side of the inequalities gives two functions that
are greater than or equal to 0, each a function of L and m. We ﬁx L = 2, 3, and
4 lanes and graph the functions to see when they are within the constraints.
268 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    Figure A2 shows valid and invalid ms given four lanes (two lines for two
possible shifts, single or double). We have q = 309.83, the carrying capacity for
a mile-long lane with s = 50, and ht = 3 seconds. The function must lie on or
above the horizontal axis for creation of a merge lane.

200
100

      50 100 150 200 250 300 350

-100

-200

-300

-400

Figure A2. Feasibility functions for one lane (thin line) and two lanes (thick line), as a function of
the number of cars per mile (m = N/L).

    The merge patrol ofﬁcer can determine q by multiplying the number of cars
counted in one minute by 6/5. If the ratio of merging trafﬁc to main-road trafﬁc
is higher than 1 : 20, there may be enough disruption that merge efﬁciency could
beneﬁt from a merge lane(s). With this ratio, and 90% ﬂow, there would be one
car merging every minute.

References

Gerlough, Daniel L., and Matthew J. Huber. 1975. Trafﬁc Flow Theory. Trans-
    portation Research Board.

Intergraph. www.intergraph.com/geoinfo/scdot.asp . Accessed 9 February
    2001.

Pressley, Sue Anne. 1999. As Hurricane Floyd approaches, record number of
    people moved. Washington Post 119, No. 42 (19 September 1999). Posted at
    http://tech.mit.edu/V119/N42/floyd.42w.html . Accessed 9 February
    2001.

Rand McNally & Company. 1998. Skokie, IL: United States Road Atlas.

Scan21. 2001. http://www.scan21.com/hurricane_main.html . Accessed 9
    February 2001.

US Census. 2001. http://www.census.gov/population/estimates/county/
    co-99-1/99C1_45.txt. Accessed 9 February 2001.
                                                                         Project H.E.R.O. 269

US Department of Transportation. 2001. http://www.dot.state.sc.us . Ac-
    cessed 9 February 2001.

Winston, Wayne L. 1994. Operations Research. Duxbury Press.
270 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
                                                                      Trafﬁc Flow Models 271

Trafﬁc Flow Models and
the Evacuation Problem

Samuel W. Malone
Carl A. Miller
Daniel B. Neill

Duke University
Durham, NC

Advisor: David P. Kraines

Introduction

    We consider several models for trafﬁc ﬂow. A steady-state model employs
a model for car-following distance to derive the trafﬁc-ﬂow rate in terms of
empirically estimated driving parameters. We go on to derive a formula for
total evacuation time as a function of the number of cars to be evacuated.

    The steady-state model does not take into account variance in speeds of
vehicles. To address this problem, we develop a cellular automata model for
trafﬁc ﬂow in one and two lanes and augment its results through simulation.

    After presenting the steady-state model and the cellular automata models,
we derive a space-speed curve that synthesizes results from both.

    We address restricting vehicle types by analyzing vehicle speed variance.
To assess trafﬁc merging, we investigate how congestion occurs.

    We bring the collective theory of our assorted models to bear on ﬁve evac-
uation strategies.

Assumptions

∑ Driver reaction time is approximately 1 sec.

∑ Drivers tend to maintain a safe distance; tailgating is unusual.

∑ All cars are approximately 10 ft long and 5 ft wide.

∑ Almost all cars on the road are headed to the same destination.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 271≠290. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
272 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Terms

Density d: the number of cars per unit distance.
Occupancy n: the proportion of the road covered by cars.
Flow q: the number of cars per time unit that pass a given point.
Separation distance s: the average distance between midpoints of successive

   cars.
Speed v: the average steady-state speed of cars.
Travel Time: how long a given car spends on the road during evacuation.
Total Travel Time: the time until the last car reaches safety.

The Steady-State Model

Development

    Car-following is described successfully by mathematical models; following
Rothery [1992, 4-1], we model the average separation distance s as a function
of common speed v:

                      s =  + v + v2,                                       (1)

where , , and  have the physical interpretations:

 = the effective vehicle length L,
 = the reaction time, and
 = the reciprocal of twice the maximum average deceleration

          of a following vehicle.

This relationship allows us to obtain the optimal value of trafﬁc density (and
speed) that maximizes ﬂow.

Theorem. For q = kV (the fundamental equation for traffic flow) and (1), traffic
flow q is maximized at

q = ( + 21/2L1/2)-1,  v = (L/)1/2,                 k  =  (/L)1/2 -   2
                                                             2 - 4L     .

Proof: Consider N identical vehicles, each of length L, traveling at a steady-
state speed v with separation distance given by (1). If we take a freeze-frame
picture of these vehicles spaced over a distance D, the relation D = N L + N s
                                                                      Trafﬁc Flow Models 273

must hold, where s is the bumper-to-bumper separation. Since s = s - L, we
obtain k = N/D = N/(N L + N s ) = 1/(L + s ) = 1/s. We invoke (1) to get

                                  k  =     +     1       v2 .
                                               v +

This is a quadratic equation in v; taking the positive root yields

                      v(k)  =  1        4      +  (2  -  4L)       -  
                               2           k                          2 .

Applying q = kv, we have

                      q(k)  =  k     4         +  (2  -  4L)     -    k
                               2           k                          2 .

Differentiating with respect to k, setting the result equal to zero, and wading
through algebra yields the optimal values given.

Interpretation and Uses

    We can estimate q, k, and v from assumptions regarding car length (L),

reaction time (), and the deceleration parameter (). If we let L = 10 ft,  = 1 s,
and   .023 s2/ft (a typical value [Rothery 1992]), we obtain

   q = 0.510 cars/s, v = 20.85 ft/s, k = 0.024 cars/ft.

A  less conservative  estimate for         is     =   1  (af-1  -  al-1),  where   af  and   al  are
                                                      2
the average maximum decelerations of the following and lead vehicles Rothery

[1992]. We assume that instead of being able to stop instantaneously (inﬁnite

deceleration capacity), the leading car has deceleration capacity twice that of

the following car. Thus, instead of  = 1/2a = .023 s2/ft, we use the implied

value for a to compute      =  1     a-1 - 2a-1          =  1    =  0.0115  s2/ft  and  get
                               2                            2

   q = 0.596 cars/s, v = 29.5 ft/s  20 mph, k = .020 cars/ft.

Going 20 mph in high-density trafﬁc with a bumper-to-bumper separation of
40 ft is not bad.

    The 1999 evacuation was far from optimal. Taking 18 h for the 120-mi
trip from Charleston to Columbia implies an average speed of 7 mph and a
bumper-to-bumper separation of 7 ft.

Limitations of the Steady-State Model

    The steady-state model does not take into account the variance of cars'
speeds. Dense trafﬁc is especially susceptible to overcompensating or under-
compensating for the movements of other drivers.

    A second weakness is that the value for maximum ﬂow gives only a ﬁrst-
order approximation of the minimum evacuation time. Determining maximum
ﬂow is distinct from determining minimum evacuation time.
274 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Minimizing Evacuation Time with
the Steady-State Model

Initial Considerations

    The goal is to keep evacuation time to a minimum, but the evacuation route
must be as safe as possible under the circumstances. How long on average it
takes a driver to get to safety (Columbia) is related to minimizing total evacu-
ation time but is not equivalent.

A General Performance Measure

    A metric M that takes into account both maximizing trafﬁc ﬂow and mini-
mizing individual transit time T is

M  =  W  N   +                    (1 - W )  D
                                              ,
         lq                                 v

where 0  W  1 is a weight factor, D is the distance that to traverse, l is

the number of lanes, and N is the number of cars to evacuate. This metric

assumes that the interaction between lanes of trafﬁc (passing) is negligible, so

that total ﬂow is that of an individual lane times the number of lanes. Given

W, minimizing M amounts to solving a one-variable optimization problem
in either v or k. Setting W = 1 corresponds to maximizing ﬂow, as in the
preceding section. Setting W = 0 corresponds to maximizing speed, subject to
the constraint v  vcruise, the preferred cruising speed; this problem has solution
M = D/vcruise. The model does not apply when cars can travel at vcruise.

    Setting W = 1/2 corresponds to minimizing the total evacuation time

         N   +                    D
                                    .
         lq v

The evacuation time is the time D/v for the ﬁrst car to travel distance D plus
the time N/lq for the N cars to ﬂow by the endpoint.

    To illustrate that maximizing trafﬁc ﬂow and maximizing speed are out of
sync, we calculate the highest value of W for which minimizing M would result
in an equilibrium speed of vcruise. This requires a formula for the equilibrium
value v that solves the problem

minimize M (v) = W N (L + v + v2) + (1 - W ) D
                                  lv             v

subject to 0 < v  vcruise.
                                                             Trafﬁc Flow Models 275

The formula for M (v) comes from (1), q = kv, and k = 1/s. Differentiating
with respect to v, setting the result equal to zero, and solving for speed yields

v = min vcruise,                   1 L + (1 - W ) ∑ Dl                      .
                                                    WN

For vcruise to equal the square root, we need

      W=  1+ N                       vc2ruise - L       -1
               Dl
                                                           .

Using N = 160,000 cars, D = 633,600 ft (120 mi), l = 2 lanes, vcruise = 60 mph =
88 ft/s,  = .0115 s2/ft, and L = 10 ft, we obtain W  1/11. Thus, minimizing
evacuation time in situations involving heavy trafﬁc ﬂow is incompatible with
allowing drivers to travel at cruise speed with a safe stopping distance.

Computing Minimum Evacuation Time

From the fact that T = 2M when W = 1/2, we obtain

q = kv,                            v = 1 [L + Dl/N ],
                                             

      1/2[L  +                  Dl/N ]-1/2     -    2   [L+  1  Dl/N  ]
                                                             2

k  =                                                    [L+Dl/N ]        .

          [2                    -  4L]  -       [Dl/N ]2
                                               [L+Dl/N ]

The minimum evacuation time is

             T                  =  N    +      D
                                   lq          v .

Predictions of the Steady-State Model

    For N large, evacuation time minimization is essentially equivalent to the
ﬂow maximization (Figure 1), and it can be shown analytically that

           lim                     Tﬂow(N )    =    1.
                                   Tmin(N )
          N 

    The predicted evacuation time of 40 h for N = 160,000 seems reasonable.
We can evaluate the impact of converting I-26 to four lanes by setting l = 4
in the equation for minimum evacuation time, yielding T  23 h. For the
steady-state model, this prediction makes sense, since the model does not deal
with the effect of the bottleneck that will occur when Columbia is swamped by
evacuees. The bottleneck would be compounded by using four lanes instead
of two. On balance, however, doubling the number of lanes would lead to a
net decrease in evacuation time.
276 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Figure 1. Comparison of minimum evacuation time (lower line) and maximum ﬂow evacuation
time (upper line).

One-Dimensional Cellular Automata Model

Development

    In heavy trafﬁc, cars make repeated stops and starts, with somewhat arbi-
trary timing; a good model of heavy trafﬁc should take this randomness into
account but also be simple enough to give an explicit formula for speed.

    We divide a single-lane road into cells of equal length. A cell contains one
car or no car. A car is blocked if the cell directly in front of it is occupied. At
each time state, cars move according to the following rules:
∑ A blocked car does not move.
∑ If a car is not blocked, it advances to the next cell with probability p.
The decisions of drivers to move forward are made independently.

   A trafﬁc conﬁguration can be represented by a function f : Z  {0, 1}, where

f (k) = 1 if cell k contains a car and f (k) = 0 if not. Probability distributions
on the set of all such functions are called binary processes.
                                              Trafﬁc Flow Models 277

Given a process X, deﬁne a process Ip(X) according to the following rule:

If            X(i), X(i + 1) = (1, 0)

then  Ip(X)(i), Ip(X)(i + 1) =      (0, 1), with probability p;
                                    (1, 0), with probability 1 - p.

This rule is identical to the trafﬁc ﬂow rule given above: If X represents the
trafﬁc conﬁguration at time t, Ip(X) gives the trafﬁc conﬁguration at time t + 1.

    We are interested in what the trafﬁc conﬁguration looks like after several
iterations of I. Let Ipn(X) mean Ip applied n times to X. The formula for trafﬁc
speed in terms of density comes from the following theorem1:

Theorem. Suppose that X is a binary process of density d. Let

                  r= 1-  1 - 4d(1 - d)p
                            2pd

and let Mp,d denote the Markov chain with transition probabilities

      0 - 0, w/ prob. 1 - r;        1 - 0, w/ prob. r;
                1, w/ prob. 1 - r;            1, w/ prob. r.

The sequence of processes X, Ip(X), Ip2(X), Ip3(X), . . . converges to Mp,d.

    Here "density" means the frequency with which 1s appear, analogous to the
average number of cars per cell. This theorem tells what the trafﬁc conﬁguration
looks like after a long period of time.

    Knowing the transition probabilities allows us to compute easily the average
speed of the cars in Mp,d: the average speed is the likelihood that a randomly
chosen car is not blocked and advances to the next cell at the next time state:

    v = P r [I(Mp,d(i)) = 0 |Mp,d(i) = 1]
        = P r [Mp,d(i + 1) = 0 |Mp,d(i) = 1]
             ∑ P r [I(Mp,d(i)) = 0 |Mp,d(i) = 1 and Mp,d(i + 1) = 0]

      = rp =  1-  1 - 4d(1 - d)p       p= 1-  1 - 4d(1 - d)p          .       (2)
                     2pd
                                              2d

    The model does not accurately simulate high-speed trafﬁc and does not take
into account following distance, and the stop-and-start model of car movement
is not accurate when trafﬁc is sparse. The model is best for slow trafﬁc (under
15 mph) with frequent stops.

    1This theorem is the result of previous research [Miller 2001] by an author of this paper. The
Appendix on binary processes (written during the contest period) gives a relatively complete proof
of the result. [EDITOR'S NOTE: We unfortunately must omit the Appendix.]
278 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Low Speeds

    We must set three parameters:

x = the size of one cell, the space taken up by a car in a tight trafﬁc jam; we
   set it to 15 ft, slightly longer than most cars.

t = the length of one time interval, the shortest time by a driver to move into
   the space in front; we take this to be 0.5 s.

p = the movement probability, representing the proportion of drivers who move
   at close to the overall trafﬁc speed; we let p = 0.85.

    In (2) we insert the factor (x/t) to convert from cells/time-state to ft/s:

v=  x  1-                         1 - 4d(1 - d)p  .
    t
                                     2d

Density d is in cars per cell, related to occupancy n by d = (15 ft/10 ft)◊n = 3n/2.
Table 1 gives v for various values of n and k.

                    Table 1.
    v for various values of n and k.

    n  K                          d      v

       ft-1                              (mph)

    0.60 0.060 0.90                      2

    0.55 0.055 0.83                      4

    0.50 0.050 0.75                      5

    0.45 0.045 0.68                      8

    0.40 0.040 0.60 10

    0.35 0.035 0.53 12

    0.30 0.030 0.45 14

    0.25 0.025 0.38 15

    0.20 0.020 0.30 16

One Lane

    To explore the one-dimensional cellular automata model, we wrote a simple
simulation in C++. The simulation consists of a 5,000-element long (circular)
array of bits, with a 1 representing a car and a 0 representing a (car-sized) empty
space. The array is initialized randomly based on a value for the occupancy n:
An element is initialized to 1 with probability n, or to 0 with probability 1 - n.
The array is iterated over 5,000 time cycles: On each cycle, a car moves forward
with probability p if the square in front of it is empty. The ﬂow q is calculated
as the number of cars N passing the end of the array divided by the number of
time cycles (i.e., q = N/5000), and thus the average speed of an individual car
in cells per time cycle is v = q/n = N/5000n.
                                            Trafﬁc Flow Models 279

                                 Table 2.
Comparison of simulation and equation values for speed.

                              Speed

              p = 1/2                     p = 3/4

n Simulation Equation Simulation Equation

0.2        0.433       0.438         0.694         0.697
                       0.349         0.592         0.589
0.4        0.356       0.232         0.392         0.392
                       0.110         0.171         0.174
0.6        0.234

0.8        0.108

    Table 2 shows results for various values of the occupancy n and probability
p, verifying the accuracy of the one-dimensional cellular automata equation (2).

    The value for p should be related to the mean and standard deviation of
vcruise. The mean and standard deviation of a binary random variable are p and

   p(1 - p). We have

     p            =µ      -          p=         1     2.

     p(1 - p)                               1+     
                                                   µ

For µ(vcruise) = 60 mph and (vcruise) = 5 mph, we get p = 144/145. Now,
L = µtp; so assuming L = 10 ft, p = 144/145, and µ = 60 mph = 88 ft/s, we
obtain a time step of 0.113 s.

    We now use the model to predict how fast (on average) a car moves in a
single lane, as a function of the occupancy. We consider the "relative speed" vrel,
the average speed divided by the (mean) cruise speed. The average speed is
given by the one-dimensional cellular automata equation, and the cruise speed
is p cells per time cycle, so this gives us

     vrel  =   vavg    =  1-  1 - 4n(1 - n)p       .
              vcruise
                                     2pn

Using p = 144/145, we calculate vrel and vavg as a function of n (Table 3).
    The model predicts that for low occupancy the average speed will be near

the cruise speed, but for occupancies greater than 0.5 the average speed will
be signiﬁcantly lower. The cellular automata model does not take following
distance into account; thus, it tends to overestimate vavg for high speeds and is
most accurate when occupancy is high and speed is low.

    Table 3 also shows ﬂow rate q = nvavg/L, in cars/s, as a function of occu-
pancy. The ﬂow rate is symmetric about n = 0.5. Each car movement can be
thought of as switching a car with an empty space, so the movement of cars to
the right is equivalent to the movement of holes to the left.

    The model fails, however, to give a reasonable value for the maximum ﬂow
rate: 4.1 cars/s  14,600 cars/h, about seven times a reasonable maximum rate
[Rothery 1992]. The reason is that the cell size equals the car length, a correct
280 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                           Table 3.
Relative speed, average speed, and ﬂow rate as a function of occupancy.

      n             vrel          vavg ﬂow rate

         (ft/s) (ft/s) (cars/s)

      0.1 .999                    88      0.9
      0.2 .998
      0.3 .995                    88      1.8
      0.4 .987
      0.5 .923                    88      2.6
      0.6 .658
      0.7 .426                    87      3.5
      0.8 .249
      0.9 .111                    81      4.1

                                  58      3.5

                                  38      2.6

                                  22      1.8

                                  10      0.9

approximation only as car speeds approach zero and occupancy approaches 1.
For n  0.5, we should have a larger cell size; so we assume that cell size equals
car length plus following distance and that following distance is proportional
to speed. Assuming a 1 s following distance, we obtain cell size as

      C = L + vavg ◊ (1 sec).

But we do not know the value of vavg until we use the cell size to obtain it! For
n large, we can assume that vavg  vcruise and ﬁnd an upper bound on cell size:

      C = L + vcruise ◊ (1 sec) = 98 ft.

We divide the original ﬂow rate by the increased cell size to obtain a more
reasonable ﬂow rate:

q  =  4.063 cars/s  =     0.415   cars/s       1,500  cars/h.
       98 ft/10 ft

This is likely to be an underestimate; for greater accuracy, we must ﬁnd a
method to compute the correct cell size before ﬁnding the speed. We address
this problem later.

Two Lanes

    We expand the one-dimensional model. The simulation consists of a two-
dimensional (1000 ◊ 2) array of bits. The array is initialized randomly and
then iterated over 1,000 time cycles: On each cycle, a car moves forward with
probability p if the cell in front of it is empty. If not, provided the cells beside
it and diagonally forward from it are unoccupied, with probability p the car
changes lanes and moves one cell forward.

    Like the one-lane simulation, the two-lane one is correct only for high den-
sities and low speeds, since it uses cell size equal to car length. Hence, we do
not use the two-lane simulation to compute the maximum ﬂow rate. However,
                                                     Trafﬁc Flow Models 281

since cell size affects ﬂow rate by a constant factor, we can compare ﬂow rates
by varying parameters of the simulation. In particular, we use this model to
examine how the ﬂow rate changes with the variance of speeds.

"But I Want to Bring My Boat!"

There are two main types of variance in speeds:

∑ t2 of traveling speed (random ﬂuctuations in the speed of a single vehicle
  over time), and

∑ m2 of mean speed (variation in the mean speeds of all vehicles).

In the one-lane simulation, we assumed that m = 0 and t = 5 mph; this
choice was reﬂected in the calculation of p, since p = 1/[1 + (t/µ)2] for every
car. When we take m into account, each car gets a different value of p:

∑ Choose the car's mean speed µ randomly from the normal distribution with
  mean vcruise and standard deviation m.

∑ The car's traveling speed will be normally distributed with mean µ and
  standard deviation t.

∑ The car's transition probability p is

                                                     

p=         µ                                    1    2  ,
    vcruise + m                             1+
                                                  t
                                                  µ

   where  is a constant best determined empirically. We use  = 0, a conser-
   vative estimate of the change in ﬂow rate as a function of m.

    We consider what effect t and m have on the speed at a given occupancy.
Considering the cars' movement as a directed random walk, increasing t in-
creases randomness in the system, causing cars to interact (and hence block
one other's movement) more often, decreasing average speed.

    The effects of m are even more dramatic: Cars with low mean speeds
impede faster cars behind them.

    We ran simulations in which we ﬁxed n = 0.5 and varied both m and t
from 0 to 15 mph. For each pair of values, we calculated average ﬂow rate for
the one- and two-lane simulations.

    Table 4 shows the effects of lane-changing by comparing maximum ﬂows
for the two-lane model with twice that for the one-lane model. For small t and
m, allowing cars to switch lanes does not increase the ﬂow rate much; for high
values, the two-lane model has a much higher ﬂow rate. Each 5 mph increase in
m results in an 11≠16% decrease in ﬂow rate (two-lane model, t = 0), while
each 5 mph increase in t results in a 5≠7% decrease in ﬂow rate (two-lane
model, m = 0). Both variances dramatically affect ﬂow rate, and m is more
signiﬁcant than t.
282 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                  Table 4.
Two-lane average ﬂow / Twice the one-lane average ﬂow.

                                  t

m  0  5                              10         15

 0 979/976 923/908 856/830 805/776
 5 822/757 817/746 790/729 753/683
10 699/537 691/518 659/485 642/469
15 588/393 569/366 540/319 518/292

"So, Can I Bring My Boat?"

    We consider how variations in vehicle type affect m, t, and ﬂow rate. Most
large vehicles (boats, campers, semis, and motor homes) travel more slowly
than most cars. A signiﬁcant proportion of large vehicles results in increased
m and hence a lower ﬂow rate.

    As a simpliﬁed approximation, we assume that there are two types of ve-
hicles: fast cars (µ = µ1) and slow trucks (µ = µ2), with proportion  of slow
trucks . We calculate

       m2 = (µ2 - µØ)2 + (1 - )(µ1 - µØ)2
              =  µ2 - µ1 - (µ1 - µ2) 2 + (1 - ) µ1 - (µ1 - µ2) 2
              = (µ1 - µ2)2 2(1 - ) + (1 - )2 = (µ1 - µ2)2(1 - ).

Thus, m = (µ1 - µ2) (1 - ). We now assume that fast cars travel at
µ1 = 70 mph and slow trucks at µ2 = 50 mph and ﬁnd m as a function of
. Random ﬂuctuations in vehicle speed are likely to depend more on driver
psychology than on vehicle type, so we assume t = 5 mph. We interpolate
linearly in Table 4 to ﬁnd the ﬂow rate (cars per 1,000 time cycles) as a function
of the proportion of slow vehicles  (Table 5).

                               Table 5.
Flow rate as a function of proportion of slow vehicles.

 t ﬂow rate % reduction in ﬂow

 0 0 923/908                            0/0
.01 1.99 881/844                      4.6/7.0
.02 2.80 864/817                     6.4/10.0
.05 4.36 831/767                     10.0/15.5
.1 6.00 792/700                      14.1/22.9
.2 8.00 741/609                      19.7/32.9
.5 10.0 691/518                      25.1/43.0

    The ﬂow rate is decreased signiﬁcantly by slow vehicles: If 1% of vehicles
are slow, the ﬂow rate decreases by 5%; if 10% of vehicles are slow, the ﬂow rate
decreases by 15%. The effects of m are magniﬁed if vehicles are unable to pass
slower vehicles; so if the highway went down to one lane at any point (due to
                                           Trafﬁc Flow Models 283

construction or accidents, for example), the ﬂow rate would be reduced even
further. Hence, we recommend no large vehicles (vehicles that may potentially
block multiple lanes) and no slow vehicles (vehicles with a signiﬁcantly lower
mean cruising speed). Exceptions could be made if a family has no other vehicle
and for vehicles with a large number of people (e.g., buses). Slow-moving
vehicles should be required to stay in the right lane and families should be
encouraged to take as few vehicles as possible.

The Space-Speed Curve

    To determine optimal trafﬁc ﬂow rates, we can combine the one-dimensional
cellular automata and the steady-state models to get a good estimate of the
relationship between speed v and the separation distance s.

 s  15: There is essentially no trafﬁc ﬂow: v(s) = 0.

 15  s  30: Trafﬁc travels at between 0 and 12 mph and the one-dimensional
   cellular automata model applies; v is approximately a linear function of s.

 30  s  140: Trafﬁc travels between 12 and 55 mph and the steady-state
   model is appropriate; v is again approximately a linear function of s, with
   less steep slope.

 140  s: Trafﬁc travels at the speed limit of 60 mph.

Incoming Trafﬁc Rates

    The optimal ﬂow is determined by the optimal ﬂow through the smallest
bottleneck. However, the time of travel (which is a more important measure
for our purposes) is affected by other factors, including the rate of incoming
trafﬁc. If incoming trafﬁc is heavy, congestion occurs at the beginning of the
route, decreasing speed and increasing travel time for each car.

    How does congestion occur and how much does it inﬂuence travel time?
Consider the one-dimensional cellular automata model with p = 1/2. Repre-
sent the road by the real line and let F (x, t) denote the density of cars at point x
on the road at time t. (For our purposes now, the cells and cars are inﬁnitesimal
in length.) Suppose that the initial conﬁguration F (x, 0) is given by

F (x, 0) =             1, if x < 0;
                       0, if x  0.

This represents a dense line of cars about to move onto an uncongested road.
    We omit units for the time being. By formulas derived earlier, the speed

v(x0, t0) at position x0 and time t0 is given by

v(x0, t0) = 1 -  1  -  2F (x0, t0  )[1  -  F  (x0,  t0)]  ,
                         2F (x0,   t0)
284 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

while speed must also equal the rate at which the number of cars past point x
is increasing; that is,

       v(x0, t0)       =  d    
                          dt
                                  F (x, t)dx (t0) .

                              x

Thus,

       dF = - dv = - d        1-        1 - 2F (1 - F )         .
       dt dx dx                            2F

This is a partial differential equation whose unique solution is

                          1,            if  x/t   <  -  1  ;
                                                        2
                    1      (x/t) ,             1                1
       F (x, t) =   2  -                if  -  2     x/t        2  ;
                             2-4(x/t)2
                                            1
                          0,            if  2  <  x/t.

Thus, after a steady inﬂux of cars for a period of t, the resulting congestion is

                       1           x
                       2-         t

                              2-4        x2
                                        t

and the congestion ends at x = t/2.
    Thus, the extent of the congested trafﬁc is linear in t. So if there is a steady

inﬂux of cars onto a highway, the extent of the resulting congestion is directly
proportional to how long it takes them to enter, thus to the number N of them.
Likewise, the time for the congestion to dissipate is proportional to N .

    This allows us to evaluate staggering evacuation times for different counties.
Suppose that n counties have populations P1, . . . , Pn. If all evacuate at the same
time, the effect of the resulting trafﬁc jam on total travel time is proportional to
the product of the extent of the jam and the time before it dissipates:

       Ttravel time = c1 ∑ c2 (P1 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn) ∑ c3 (P1 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn)
                        = c1c2c3 (P1 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn)2

for some constants c1, c2, c3. If the evacuations are staggered, the effect is

       Ttravel time = c1c2c3P12 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + c1c2c3Pn2 = c1c2c3 P12 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn2 .

Now, P12 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn2 < (P1 + ∑ ∑ ∑ + Pn)2; so unless one of the counties has a
much larger population than the rest, the difference between these two values
is relatively large. We therefore recommend staggering counties.

The Effects of Merges and Diverges

While the steady-state model is a reasonably accurate predictor of trafﬁc behav-
ior on long homogeneous stretches of highway, we must also consider how to
                                         Trafﬁc Flow Models 285

deal with the effects of road inhomogeneities: merges of two lanes into a single
lane and "diverges" of one lane into two lanes. To do so, we apply the princi-
ple of conservation of trafﬁc [Kuhne and Michalopolous 1992]. Assuming that
there are no sources or sinks in a region, we have

                                           q + k = 0,
                                           x t

where q is ﬂow rate (cars/s), k is density (cars/ft), x is location (ft), and t is
time (s). Let the merge or diverge occurs at a speciﬁc point x. In the steady
state (i.e., for D/t = 0), we have q/x = 0, so ﬂow conserved at a junction.

    For a ﬂow qs merging or diverging ﬂows q1 and q2, we have qs = q1 + q2. If
proportion P (0 < P < 1) of the ﬂow qs going to (or coming from) q1, and we
know either density (ks or k1), we can solve for the other density:

                q1 = P qs, k1v1 = P ksvs, k1v(k1) = P ksv(ks).

From the steady-state model, for the given values of the constants, we know

    88 ft/s ,                            0 < k < 0.0056;
v(k) =
            21.7  .08  +  .092  -  1  ,  0.0056 < k < 0.1.
                            k

Assuming that both densities are greater than the free-travel density k = .0056,
we can set

k1  .08 + .092 - 1     = P ks         .08 + .092 - 1 .
             k1                                ks

Given either ks or k1, we can solve numerically for the other. Then we can ﬁnd
the speeds associated with each density using the above expression for v(k).

    Solving the equation gives two values; we assume that the density is greater
on the single-lane side of the junction (i.e., density increases at a merge and
decreases at a diverge). Also, if solving produces a speed v1 that is larger than
vcruise, we set v1 = vcruise and calculate n1 = q1/v1.

    How is the steady-state ﬂow rate determined on a path with merges and
diverges? Following Daganzo [1997], we consider a bottleneck to be a location
(such as a merge or diverge) where queues can form and persist with free ﬂow
downstream. The bottleneck capacity is the maximum ﬂow rate through the
bottleneck, which (with Daganzo) we assume to be constant. If a steady-state
ﬂow greater than the bottleneck capacity attempts to enter the bottleneck, the
queue size will increase until it stretches all the way back to its origin. At that
point, the steady-state ﬂow is blocked by the queue of cars and decreases to the
bottleneck capacity. Hence, the maximum steady-state ﬂow rate along a path
is the minimum capacity of all bottlenecks along the path.
286 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Parallel Paths

    From A to B, let there be multiple parallel paths p1, . . . , pm with bottleneck
capacities c1, . . . , cm. The maximum steady-state ﬂow rate from A to B is the
minimum of:

∑ the bottleneck capacity of the diverge at point A,

∑ the bottleneck capacity of the merge at point B, and

∑ the sum of the bottleneck capacities of all paths pi.

If a path has no bottlenecks, its capacity is the maximum ﬂow rate predicted
by the steady-state model.

    We focus on maximizing ﬂow rate rather than minimizing evacuation time,
since for a large number of cars, maximizing ﬂow gives near-minimal evacua-
tion time. The maximum ﬂow rate qmax from Charleston to Columbia is

qmax = min                           qi, c0, cf ,

                                  i

where qi is the maximum ﬂow rate of path i, c0 is the bottleneck capacity of
Charleston, and cf is the bottleneck capacity of Columbia. The ﬂow rates qi are

qi = min(b1 . . . bn, qi,ss),

where b1, . . . , bn are the capacities of bottlenecks along the given route and qi,ss
is the maximum ﬂow along that route as predicted by the steady-state model.

    We ﬁrst consider evacuation with no bottlenecks along I-26. Denoting the
steady-state value qI-26,ss by qI , this gives us qmax = min(qI , c0, cf ). Which factor
limits qmax? We cannot achieve qI  2,000 cars/h if if either c0 < 2,000 (trafﬁc
jam in Charleston) or cf < 2,000 (trafﬁc jam in Columbia). With the trafﬁc in
Columbia splitting into three different roads, there should be less congestion

there than with everyone merging onto I-26 in Charleston. Hence, we assume
that c0 < cf , so the limiting factor is c0 if c0 < 2,000 and qI if c0 > 2,000.
The value of c0 is best determined empirically, perhaps by extrapolation from
Charleston rush-hour trafﬁc data or from data from the 1999 evacuation.

Effects of Proposed Strategies

Reversing I-26

    Reversing I-26 doubles qI to 4,000 cars/h. It is likely to increase c0 as well,
since cars can be directed to two different paths onto I-26 and are thus less likely
to interfere with the merging of cars going on the other set of lanes. On the other
hand, twice as many cars will enter the Columbia area simultaneously, and the
                                                                      Trafﬁc Flow Models 287

unchanged capacity cf may become the limiting factor. It may be possible to
increase cf by rerouting some of the extra trafﬁc to avoid Columbia, or even
turning around trafﬁc on some highways leading out of Columbia.

    Thus, this strategy is likely to improve evacuation trafﬁc ﬂow.

Reversing Other Highways

    A similar argument applies to turning around the trafﬁc on the smaller
highways. Each highway adds some capacity to the total i qi, increasing this
term, but each highway's capacity is signiﬁcantly less than qI , and increas-
ing the number of usable highways has unclear effects on c0. It may increase
capacity by spreading out Charleston residents to different roads, or crossing
evacuation routes may lead to trafﬁc jams. As with the reversal of I-26, rever-
sal of smaller highways does not affect cf (unless crossing evacuation routes
becomes a problem in Columbia). More important, the interactions between
highways (merges and diverges) may lead to bottlenecks, reducing capacity.
In fact, interactions between these highways and I-26 could cause bottlenecks
that slow the ﬂow on I-26, perhaps offsetting the extra capacity of the smaller
highways. Thus, it is safer not to turn around trafﬁc on the secondary highways
or to encourage using these as evacuation routes.

Temporary Shelters

    Establishing temporary shelters in Columbia, to reduce the trafﬁc leaving
that city, could be useful if only some of the cars are directed into Columbia; thus
the ﬂow of trafﬁc in the Columbia area would be split into four streams rather
than three, possibly increasing cf . Nevertheless, we hesitate to recommend this
strategy, since the actual effects are likely to be the opposite. Evacuees entering
Columbia are likely to create congestion there, making it difﬁcult for trafﬁc to
enter, resulting in a major bottleneck. Without careful regulation, more people
will try to stay in Columbia than the available housing, and frantic attempts of
individuals driving around looking for housing will exacerbate the bottleneck.
Hence, it is most likely that cf will decrease signiﬁcantly, probably becoming
the limiting factor on maximum ﬂow rate.

Staggering Trafﬁc Flows

    Staggering is likely to reduce the time for an average car to travel from
Charleston to Columbia while leaving the value of the steady-state ﬂow rate
qI unchanged. Hence, staggering decreases total evacuation time; it may also
increase maximum ﬂow rate, since it decreases the number of cars traveling
toward I-26 at any one time, reducing the size of the co bottleneck. Increasing
the capacity co, however, increases the ﬂow rate only when co is the limiting
factor.
288 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Evacuees from Florida and Georgia

    Since evacuation time is proportional to number of cars over ﬂow rate, out-
of-state evacuees add to total evacuation time unless they take a route that does
not intersect the paths of the South Carolina evacuees. However, it is very hard
to constrain the routes of out-of-state evacuees, since they come from a variety
of paths and are unlikely to be informed of the state's evacuation procedures. In
particular, major bottlenecks are likely at the intersections of I-26 with I-95 and
of I-95 with I-20 and U.S. 501. If many cars from I-95 attempt to go northwest
on I-26 toward Columbia, qI will no longer equal 2,000 cars/h but instead the
capacity of the I-26/I-95 bottleneck. This is likely to reduce qI signiﬁcantly and
likely make qI-26 the limiting factor.

    A similar argument suggests that I-95 trafﬁc will impede the ﬂow of trafﬁc
west from Myrtle Beach by causing a bottleneck at the I-95/I-20 junction. Trafﬁc
ﬂow from Myrtle Beach is less than from Charleston, and many of the cars from
I-95 may have already exited at I-26; so the bottleneck at the I-20 junction is
likely to be less severe. Nevertheless, the ﬂow of evacuees from Florida and
Georgia has the potential to reduce dramatically the success of the evacuation.

References

Daganzo, C.F., et al. 1997. Causes and effects of phase transitions in highway
    trafﬁc. ITS Research Report UCB-ITS-RR-97-8 (December 1997).

Gartner, Nathan, Carroll J. Messer, and Ajay K. Rathi. 1992. Trafﬁc Flow Theory:
    A State of the Art Report. Revised monograph. Special Report 165. Oak
    Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. http://www.tfhrc.gov/its/
    tft/tft.htm .

Kuhne, R., and P. Michalopolous. 1992. Continuum ﬂow models. Chapter 5 in
    Gartner et al. [1992].

Miller, Carl A. 2001. Trafﬁc ﬂow, random growth models, and the longest
    common subsequence problem. In preparation.

Rothery, R.W. 1992. Car following models. Chapter 4 in Gartner et al. [1992].
                                          Trafﬁc Flow Models 289

Modeling Hurricane
Evacuation Strategies

    Durham, NC, Feb. 12-- Hur-            be implemented. Although doubling
ricanes pose a serious threat to citi-    the number of lanes will not necessar-
zens on the South Carolina coastline,     ily cut the evacuation time in half, or
as well as other beach dwellers in        even double the ﬂow rate on I-26 away
Florida, Georgia, and other neighbor-     from the coast, it will signiﬁcantly im-
ing states. In 1999, the evacuation ef-   prove the evacuation time under al-
fort preceding the expected landfall of   most any weather conditions.
Hurricane Floyd led to a monumen-
tal trafﬁc jam that posed other, also         Our models suggest that stagger-
serious, problems to the more than        ing the evacuation of different coun-
500,000 commuters who ﬂed the coast-      ties is also a good idea. Taking such
line and headed for the safe haven        action on the one hand will reduce
of Columbia. Several strategies have      the severity of the bottleneck that
been proposed to avoid a future repeat    occurs when the masse of evacuees
of this trafﬁc disaster.                  reaches Columbia, and on the other
                                          hand could potentially increase aver-
    First, it has been suggested that     age trafﬁc speed without signiﬁcantly
the two coastal bound lanes of I-26       increasing trafﬁc density. The net ef-
be turned into two lanes of Columbia      fect of implementing this strategy will
bound trafﬁc. A second strategy           likely be an overall decrease in coastal
would involve staggering the evacua-      evacuation time.
tion of the coastal counties over some
time period consistent with how hur-          The next strategy, which sug-
ricanes affect the coast, instead of all  gests turning trafﬁc around on sev-
at once. Third, the state might turn      eral smaller highways, is not so easy
around trafﬁc ﬂow on several of the       to recommend. The main reason for
smaller highways besides I-26 that ex-    this is that the unorganized evacua-
tend inland from the coast. The fourth    tion attempts of many people on fre-
strategy under consideration is a plan    quently intersecting secondary roads
to establish more temporary shelters      is a recipe for inefﬁciency. In places
in Columbia. Finally, the state is        where these roads intersect I-26, the
considering placing restrictions on the   merging of a heightened volume of
type and number of vehicles that can      secondary road trafﬁc is sure to cause
be brought to the coast.                  bottlenecks on the interstate that could
                                          signiﬁcantly impede ﬂow. To make a
    In the interest of the public, we     strategy of turning around trafﬁc on
have developed and tested several         secondary roads workable, the state
mathematical models of trafﬁc ﬂow         would have to use only roads that
to determine the efﬁcacy of each pro-     have a high capacity, at least two lanes,
posal. On balance, they suggest that      and a low potential for trafﬁc conﬂicts
the ﬁrst strategy is sound and should     with other highways. This would re-
290 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

quire competent trafﬁc management         tion. Although buses slow down traf-
directed at avoiding bottlenecks and      ﬁc, they are beneﬁcial because they ap-
moving Charleston trafﬁc to Columbia      preciably decrease the overall number
with as few evacuation route conﬂicts     of drivers. In all cases, slow-moving
as possible.                              vehicles should be required to travel in
                                          the right lane during the evacuation.
    The fourth proposal, of estab-
lishing more temporary shelters in            In addition to the strategies men-
Columbia, is a poor idea. Because         tioned above, commuters in the 1999
it is assumed that travelers are rela-    evacuation were acutely aware of
tively safe once they reach Columbia,     the effect on trafﬁc ﬂow produced
the main objective of the evacuation ef-  by coastal residents of Georgia and
fort should be minimizing the transit     Florida traveling up I-95. We have
time to Columbia and the surrounding      concluded that, when high-volume
area. It is fairly clear that increasing  trafﬁc ﬂows such as these compete for
the number of temporary shelters in       the same trafﬁc pipeline, the nearly
Columbia would lead to an increased       inevitable result is a bottleneck. A
volume of trafﬁc to the city (by rais-    reasonable solution to this problem
ing expectations that there will be free  would be to bar I-95 trafﬁc from merg-
beds there) and exacerbate the trafﬁc     ing onto I-26 and instead encourage
problem in the city itself (due to an     and assist drivers on I-95 to use the
increased demand for parking). To-        more prominent, inland bound sec-
gether, these two factors are sure to     ondary roads connected to that inter-
worsen the bottleneck caused by I-26      state.
trafﬁc entering Columbia and would
probably increase the total evacuation        To conclude, we think that com-
time by decreasing the trafﬁc ﬂow on      bining the more successful strategies
the interstate.                           suggested could lead to a substantial
                                          reduction in evacuation time, the pri-
    The ﬁnal proposal of placing lim-     mary measure of evacuation success.
itations on the number and types of       Minimizing the number of accidents
vehicles that can be brought to the       that occur en route is also important,
beach is reasonable. Families with        but our models directed at the former
several cars should be discouraged        goal do not make compromises with
from bringing all of their vehicles and   the latter objective. In fact, the prob-
perhaps required to register with the     lem of minimizing accidents is chieﬂy
state if the latter is their intention.   taken care of by ensuring that trafﬁc
Large, cumbersome vehicles such as        ﬂow is as orderly and efﬁcient as pos-
motor homes should be discouraged         sible.
unless they are a family's only op-

-- Samuel W. Malone, Carl A. Miller, and Daniel B. Neill in Durham, NC
                                                            The Crowd Before the Storm 291

The Crowd Before the Storm

Jonathan David Charlesworth
Finale Pankaj Doshi
Joseph Edgar Gonzalez

The Governor's School
renamed August 2001:
Maggie L. Walker Governor's School

    for Government and International Studies
Richmond, VA

Advisor: John A. Barnes

Introduction

    Applying safety regulations and ﬂow-density equations, we ﬁnd the maxi-
mum rate of ﬂow through a lane of road is 1,500 cars/h, occurring when cars
travel at 27.6 mph.

    We construct a computer simulation that tracks the exit of cars through
South Carolina's evacuation network. We attempt to optimize the network by
reversing opposing lanes on various roads and altering the time that each city
should begin evacuating, using a modiﬁed genetic algorithm.

    The best solution--the one that evacuates the most people in 24 h--involves
reversing all the opposing lanes on evacuation routes. Increasing the holding
capacity of Columbia is only marginally helpful. Georgia and Florida trafﬁc
on I-95 is only mildly detrimental, but allowing people to take their boats and
campers greatly decreases the number of people that can be evacuated.

Background on Evacuation Plans

    After the 1999 evacuation, the South Carolina Department of Transportation
(SCDOT) designated evacuation routes for all major coastal areas, including 14
different ways to leave the coast from 32 regions. The routes take evacuees past
I-95 and I-20. Although ofﬁcers direct trafﬁc at intersections, trafﬁc on roads
not in in the plan may have long waits to get onto roads in the plan. Moreover,
the South Carolina Emergency Preparedness Division (SCEPD) does not call

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 291≠299. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
292 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

for any trafﬁc type limitations (i.e., all campers, RVs, and cars with boats are
allowed) [South Carolina Department of Public Safety 1999].

Assumptions

Assumptions About Hurricanes

∑ There is exactly one hurricane on the East Coast of the United States at the
   time of the evacuation.

∑ The hurricane, like Floyd, moves along the South Carolina coast. Most
   Atlantic hurricanes that reach the United States follow a northeasterly path
   along the coast [Vaccaro 2000].

Assumptions About Trafﬁc Flow

∑ All cities act as points. The smaller streets within a city do not affect ﬂow in
   and out of a city.

∑ The capacity of a city is the sum of its hotel rooms and the number of cars
   that can ﬁt on the city's roads.

∑ The ﬂow between intersections is constant.

∑ Density of trafﬁc between intersections is constant.

∑ Charlotte and Gastonia in North Carolina; Spartanburg, Greenville, and An-
   derson in South Carolina; and Augusta, Georgia are inﬁnite drains, meaning
   that we do not route people beyond them. Flow out of these cities should
   not create trafﬁc jams. The cities are also large and therefore should be able
   to accommodate most if not all incoming evacuees.

∑ After the order to evacuate is issued, vehicles immediately ﬁll the roads.

∑ Trafﬁc regulators attempt to maintain the ideal density, using South Car-
   olina's GIS system.

∑ All motorized vehicles are 16 ft long. This takes into account the percent-
   age of motorcycles, compact cars, sedans, trucks, boats, and RVs and their
   lengths.

∑ On average, three people travel in one vehicle.

∑ The trafﬁc that enters I-95 from Georgia or Florida stays on I-95 and travels
   through South Carolina.
                                                 The Crowd Before the Storm 293

Assumptions About People

∑ All people on the coast follow evacuation regulations immediately.
∑ Drivers obey the speed limit and keep a safe following distance.

Flow-Density Relationship

    Flow is the number of vehicles passing a point on the road per unit time.
The ﬂow q on a road depends on the velocity v and density k of vehicles on the
road:

                    q = kv.                                           (1)

Empirical studies suggest that velocity and density are related by [Jayakrishnan
et al. 1996]:

             v = uf     1- k                     a                    (2)
                             kj
                                                  ,

where kj is the density of a road in a trafﬁc jam, a is a parameter dependent
on the road and vehicle conditions, and uf , free velocity, is speed at which a
vehicle would travel if their were no other vehicles on the road. Generally, the
free velocity is the speed limit of the road.

    We substitute (2) into (1) to obtain ﬂow as a function of density:

    q = kuf             1- k                     a                    (3)
                             kj
                                                  .

This equation is linear in the free velocity. To ﬁnd the ideal density that produces
the fastest ﬂow, we take the ﬁrst derivative of the ﬂow with respect to density
and set it equal to zero:

    1- k     a          k                    1- k     a-1
         kj             kj                        kj
uf              -  auf                                     = 0.

Solving for k, we ﬁnd the ideal density ki:

                ki   =   kj                  1.
                        a+

Assuming that all roads behave similarly, we ﬁnd a numerical value for the
ideal density. Jam density is generally between 185 and 250 vehicles/mile
[Haynie 2000]; we use the average value of 218 vehicles/mile. By ﬁtting (2)
to Kockelman's ﬂow-density data for various cars, road conditions, and driver
types in Kockelman [1998], we ﬁnd that a has an average value of 3 (Figure 1).
Therefore, the ideal density is 54 vehicles per mile.
294 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Figure 1. Plot of observed counts vs. density. Data from Kockelman [1998] with our curve of ﬁt of
the form (2).

To account for reaction time, vehicles must be spaced at least 2 s apart

[NJDOT 1999]. For vehicles spaced exactly 2 s apart, we can ﬁnd the density of

a road where all vehicles are traveling at speed v. The distance dc required by a
vehicle traveling at speed v is the sum of the vehicle's length and its following

distance:

           dc  =  l      +            2v
                                     3600 ,

where the units are miles and hours. The maximum safe density of a road is
the maximum number of vehicles on the road (the length of the road divided
by the space required for each vehicle) divided by the length of the road:

           k   =                     1     .

                      l  +            2v
                                     3600

If each car is 16 ft (3.03 ◊ 10-3 mi) long and the density is ideal, then the
maximum safe velocity of the vehicles is 27.6 mph.

    Knowing the ideal density and the maximum safe velocity at that density,
we use (1) to ﬁnd the maximum ﬂow:

           q = kv = 1500.                         (4)

The free velocity parameter is needed to ﬁnd the ﬂow at situations other than
ideal. Using (2), we ﬁnd that the free velocity is 65.2 mph--close to the high-
way speed limit, thus validating the approach for ﬁnding the free velocity.
Substituting the known and derived values of free velocity, jam density, and
the exponential parameter into (3), we quantify the ﬂow-density relationship:

           q = 62.5k              1  -   k    3
                                        218
                                               .
                                                            The Crowd Before the Storm 295

Trafﬁc Flow Model

Mapping the Region

    We programmed in Java a simpliﬁed map of South Carolina that consists of
107 junctions (cities) and 154 roads. A junction is an intersection point between
two or more roads. A road connects exactly two junctions. Our map includes
most of the roads in by SCEPD's model and many more. Data for the number
of cars, boats, and campers in each city used in the computer model can be
found in the Appendix. [EDITOR'S NOTE: We omit the Appendix.]

Behavior of Cities

    Each point in the program stores a city's population and regulates trafﬁc
ﬂow into and out of the roads connected to it. First, it ﬂows cars out of the
city into each road. The desired ﬂow out--the maximum number of vehicles
that the road can take--is deﬁned by the ﬂow-density equation (4) for the road
that the cars are entering. If the total number of vehicles that can be exited
exceeds the evacuee population of the city, then the evacuees are distributed
proportionally among the roads with respect to the size of the road.

    Next, the city lets vehicles in. The roads always try to ﬂow into the city at
the ideal ﬂow rate. The city counts the total number of cars being sent to it and
compares this to its current evacuee capacity. If the evacuee capacity is less
than the number of vehicles trying to enter, the city accepts a proportion of the
vehicles wanting to enter, depending on the road size. A check in the program
ensures that the number of vehicles taken from the road does not exceed the
number of cars on the road at that time.

    After repeating the entering and exiting steps for each road, the city recal-
culates its current evacuee population, removing all the vehicles that left and
adding all the vehicles that entered.

Behavior of Roads

    We deﬁne each road by its origin junction, destination junction, length, and
number of lanes. The number of lanes is the number of lanes in a certain direc-
tion under nonemergency circumstances. For example, a road that normally
has one lane north and one lane south is considered a one-lane highway. If the
number of lanes on a road changes between cities, we use the smaller number
of lanes. To analyze the possibility of turning both lanes to go only north or
only south, our program would double the number of lanes.

    During an evacuation, trafﬁc never needs to ﬂow in both directions, be-
cause the net ﬂow of a road that ﬂowed equally in two directions would be
zero. Therefore, each road has a direction deﬁned by its origin junction and
destination junction. While the origin junction is normally the point closer to
296 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

the coast, the program analyzes the possibility of having the road ﬂow from its
"destination" to "origin." In some cases, this could provide the optimal ﬂow
out of the coastal areas by ﬁnding alternative routes.

    We model trafﬁc congestion as a funnel. As long as vehicles are on the
road, they attempt to exit at the ideal ﬂow rate. However, if the road begins
to ﬁll, then the number of vehicles entering the road varies depending on the
ﬂow-density equation (4). We determine the new density of the road via

Di  =  ni                         + ni ,
                                   d

where ni is the initial number of vehicles on the road, ni is the difference
between the cars entered and cars exited, and d is the length of the road (mi).

Optimization Algorithm

    We use a modiﬁed genetic optimization algorithm, beginning from South
Carolina's current solution into the evacuation. The simulation stores a pos-
sible solution as two chromosomes: a city chromosome, storing the time to
start evacuating coastal cities, and a road chromosome, storing directions and
reversals of the roads. Stored with the solution is the number of people left in
the evacuation zone after 24 h, the usual advance notice for evacuation.

    The simulation randomly chooses a chromosome and a gene to mutate. We
use a uniform distribution to choose ﬁrst the chromosome, then the gene, and
ﬁnally a value for that gene. City genes can take the value of any time step
between 0 and 12 h before starting to evacuate. Road direction can be in either
the speciﬁed direction, the reversed direction, or closed. Opposing lanes can
be either reversed or not reversed. If the changed chromosome leaves fewer
people in the evacuation region in 24 h, it replaces the old chromosomes.

Results

    Knowing that the maximum ﬂow of a one-lane road is 1,500 cars per hour,
we ﬁrst tested South Carolina's current evacuation route with our modiﬁed ﬂow
equations, which allow for more people to leave the evacuation region. After
24 h, 556,000 people (58% of the people needing to leave) were still left in the
cities needing evacuation. If only I-26 was reversed, the people left dropped
to 476,000 (50%). However, if people were allowed to take their boats and
campers with them, the number left was 619,000. Therefore, boats, campers,
and extra cars generally should not be allowed to evacuate.

    After 10,000 iterations, the solutions were still improving. Therefore, we
restarted the program with all roads beginning with lanes reversed and cities
evacuating immediately. After 10,000 iterations, the program could not ﬁnd a
better solution than one in which 233,000 people (25%) are left.
                                                            The Crowd Before the Storm 297

    If I-95 is too congested due to trafﬁc from Georgia and South Carolina (i.e.,
I-95 is not used in the simulation), the number of people left is 254,000, 9.4%
more than if the highway had been clear.

    Increasing Columbia's evacuee capacity helps the evacuation only marginally,
removing only 948 more people from danger.

    Regardless of the situation, the solutions always have cities that start evac-
uating immediately: Staggered solutions are not optimal.

Stability Analysis

    We tested the ﬂow equations in the evacuation simulation by varying the
exponential parameter, the free velocity, and the jam density. When the ex-
ponential parameter was increased or decreased by 1, the number of people
evacuated changed by only 0.2% and 1.0%. Doubling or halving the free ve-
locity caused variations of 3.4%. Doubling and halving the jam density caused
variations of 2.2%. The length of the car did not affect the number of people
emptied from the city because the following distance was so large compared to
the length of the car. Finally, we doubled and halved the iterative time step of
the evacuation simulation, which did not change number of people evacuated.
Thus, this model was robust in every variable tested.

Strengths and Weaknesses

Strengths

∑ The model can be used for any evacuation. For, example, if a meteor were
   predicted to hit the Atlantic Ocean and ﬂood a strip of land 50 mi wide along
   the Atlantic Coast, this model could be used to evacuate residents of South
   Carolina to areas not affected by the ﬂood.

∑ Moreover, the program is ﬂexible enough to work for any possible map; it
   is not speciﬁc to the individual roads and cities of South Carolina.

∑ The model is stable with regards to all variables tested, and the optimization
   algorithm runs very quickly.

Weaknesses

∑ The greatest weakness of this model is that it assumes that people will follow
   directions: use the two-second following distance rule, travel at the speed
   limit, and travel on assigned roads.

∑ The model assumes density homogeneity along each road after each itera-
   tion, while in reality the density varies.
298 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

∑ The model can handle only situations where the roads are empty at the
   beginning of the simulation.

∑ We underestimated the holding capacity of the cities, leading to a slower exit
   from the unsafe regions. Thus, although the relative changes in the results
   are probably correct, the actual number of people in danger after 24 hours
   is probably fewer.

∑ The optimization algorithm can get stuck in local minima.

Conclusion

    Reversing trafﬁc on all evacuation routes evacuates the most people. Trafﬁc
from Georgia and Florida is not a problem, but many boats and campers would
signiﬁcantly decrease ﬂow.

    Hence, we suggest that roads be reversed and that to maintain maximum
ﬂow, trafﬁc regulators not allow the number of cars in a stretch of road to exceed
54.4 per lane per mile, by regulating on- and off-ramps at cities.

References

Feigenbaum, Edward D., and Mark L. Ford. 1984. South Carolina Title 25,
    Chapter 1, Article 4. In Emergency Management in the States, 46. Council on
    State Governments.

Haynie, S.G. 2000. WWW Transportation Tutorial Site. North Carolina State
    University.
    http://www.eos.ncsu.edu/eos/info/ce400_info/www2/flow1.html . Ac-
    cessed 12 February 2001.

Jayakrishnan, R., U. Rathi, C. Rindt, and G. Vaideeshwaran. 1996. Enhance-
    ments to a simulated framework for analyzing urban trafﬁc networks with
    ATIS/ATMS. PATH Research Report UCB-ITS-PRR-96-27 (October 1996).

Kockelman, K.M. 1998. Changes in the ﬂow-density relation due to environ-
    mental, vehicle, and driver characteristics. Transportation Research Record
    (Paper Number 980734) 1644: 47≠56.

New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT). 1999. 1999 Driver's Man-
    ual. http://liberty.state.nj.us/mvs/dm99/99ch5c.htm\#Two .
    Accessed 12 February 2001.

Real-time GIS assists hurricane evacuation. 2000. American City and County
    (February 2000) 115 (2): 24.

South Carolina Emergency Preparedness Division, South Carolina Department
    of Public Safety. 1999. Evacuation Plan. http://www.dot.state.sc.us/
    getting/evacmid.html . Accessed 12 February 2001.
                                                            The Crowd Before the Storm 299

Vaccaro, Chris. 2000. 1999 hurricane season closes, sets records. USA Today.
    http://www.usatoday.com/weather/hurricane/1999/atlantic/
    wrapup99.htm . Accessed 12 February 2001.

The Crowd Before the Storm:
Improved Hurricane
Evacuation Routes Planned

    Columbia, SC, Feb. 12-- A new        compared to 42% under South Car-
mathematical model prepared for the      olina's current plan.
South Carolina Emergency Prepared-
ness Division should end aggravating         Although more people may be
and dangerous backups when a hurri-      evacuated, don't expect to get out of
cane threatens South Carolina. In re-    the region too quickly. The model pre-
sponse to the monstrous trafﬁc jams      dicts that the fastest evacuation will
that turned I-26 northbound out of       occur if all cars travel at 28 mph. At
Charleston into a parking lot during     that rate, it will take you 4 hours to get
the Hurricane Floyd evacuation, the      out of the evacuation region.
new model distributes trafﬁc over sev-
eral smaller routes.                         The model used a "genetic algo-
                                         rithm" approach, which involves test-
    One of the new program's con-        ing possible solutions against each
troversial trafﬁc-control methods is to  other and "breeding" new ones from
make all lanes of trafﬁc on evacuation   the best ones so far. Further anal-
routes to run in the same direction,     ysis showed that reversing lanes of
away from the beach, to improve traf-    all roads along the evacuation routes
ﬁc ﬂow.                                  is the best method for quick evacua-
                                         tion. The computer tested 10,000 mi-
    People with campers, RVs, boats,     nor changes without ﬁnding a more
and more than one car should leave       effective solution.
as early as possible if a hurricane is
predicted; once the new plan is im-          Increasing the housing and park-
plemented, families may be permitted     ing capacity of Columbia by construct-
only one car, to reduce trafﬁc.          ing a shelter there would be only
                                         mildly helpful. On a more positive
    The model counteracts these minor    note, residents do not need to worry
inconveniences by evacuating 75% of      about trafﬁc from Georgia and Florida
the population at risk within 24 hours,  slowing the evacuation.

      -- Jonathan David Charlesworth, Finale Pankaj Doshi, and Joseph Edgar
Gonzalez, in Richmond, Virginia.
300 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
                                                                      Jammin' with Floyd 301

Jammin' with Floyd:
A Trafﬁc Flow Analysis of South
Carolina Hurricane Evacuation

Christopher Hanusa
Ari Nieh
Matthew Schnaider

Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA

Advisor: Ran Libeskind-Hadas

Introduction

    We analyze the 1999 Hurricane Floyd evacuation with a trafﬁc-ﬂow model,
explaining the extreme congestion on I-26. Then we look at the new South
Carolina Hurricane Evacuation Plan, which includes lane reversals. We analyze
their effect; they would signiﬁcantly beneﬁt trafﬁc leaving Charleston. With
lane reversals, the maximum number of vehicles passing any point on I-26 is
6,000 cars/h.

    We develop two plans to evacuate the South Carolina coast: the ﬁrst by
geographic location, the second by license-plate parity.

    We explore the use of temporary shelters; we ﬁnd that I-26 has sufﬁcient
capacity for oversized vehicles; and we determine the effects of evacuees from
Georgia and Florida.

Trafﬁc Flow Model

    The following deﬁnitions and model are taken directly from Mannering and
Kilareski [1990, 168≠182].

    The primary dependent variable is level of service (LOS), or amount of
congestion, of a roadway. There are six different LOS conditions, A through F,
with A being the least congested and F being the most congested. We focus on
the distinction between levels E and F.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 301≠310. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
302 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

∑ Level of Service E represents operating conditions at or near capacity level. All
   speeds are reduced to a low but relatively uniform value, normally between
   30 and 46 mph.

∑ Level of Service F is used to deﬁne forced or breakdown ﬂow, with speeds
   of less than 30 mph. This condition exists wherever the amount of trafﬁc
   approaching a point exceeds the amount that can traverse that point. Queues
   form behind such locations.

    If we enter LOS F, the roadway has exceeded its capacity and the usefulness
of the evacuation has broken down. An evacuation strategy that results in a
highway reaching LOS F is unacceptable.

    For a given highway, we can determine the maximum number of vehicles
that can ﬂow through a particular section while maintaining a desired level
of service. To make this more concrete, we deﬁne the characteristic quantity
maximum service ﬂow.

Deﬁnition. Maximum Service Flow (MSFi) for a given level of service i, assuming
ideal roadway conditions, is the maximum possible rate of ﬂow for a peak 15-
min period, expanded to an hourly volume and expressed in passenger cars per
hour per lane (pcphpl). To calculate the MSF of a highway for a given LOS, we
multiply the road's capacity under ideal conditions by the volume-to-capacity
ratio for the desired LOS. More formally,

MSFi                                 =  cj  v    (1)
                                              ,

                                            ci

where cj is the capacity under ideal conditions for a freeway with Design
Speed j, and (v/c)i is the maximum volume-to-capacity ratio associated with
LOS i. For highways with 60- and 70-mph design speeds, cj is 2,000 pcphpl
[Transportation Research Board 1985]. Since LOS E is considered to be "at
capacity," (v/c)E = 1.0. The design speed of a road is based mostly on the
importance and grade of the road; roads that are major and have shallower

grades have higher design speeds. The elevation proﬁle along I-26 shows that

South Carolina is ﬂat enough to warrant the highest design speed.
    An immediate consequence of (1) is that to maintain MSFE or better (which

we consider necessary for a successful evacuation), the number of passenger

cars per hour per lane must not exceed 2,000 for any highway.

    For it to be useful in model calculations, we need to convert the maximum

service ﬂow to a quantity that conveys information about a particular roadway.

This quantity is known as the service ﬂow rate of a roadway.

Deﬁnition. The service ﬂow rate for level of service i, denoted SFi, is the actual
maximal ﬂow that can be achieved given a roadway and its unique set of
prevailing conditions. The service ﬂow rate is calculated as

SFi = MSFiN fwfHVfp,                             (2)

in terms of the adjustment factors:
                                                                      Jammin' with Floyd 303

N : the number of lanes,

fw: the adjustment for nonideal lane widths and lateral clearances,

fHV: effect of nonpassenger vehicles, and

fp: the adjustment for nonideal driver populations.

We assume that the lanes on I-26 and other highways are ideal (i.e., fw = 1): at
least 12 ft wide with obstructions at least 6 ft from traveled pavement [Manner-
ing and Kilareski 1990]. To account for driver unfamiliarity with reversed lanes
and stress of evacuation, we set fp = 0.7 for reversed lanes and fp = 0.8 for
normal lanes, in accordance with Mannering and Kilareski [1990]. The model
also employs an adjustment factor, denoted fHV, for reduction of ﬂow due to
heavy vehicles such as trucks, buses, RVs, and trailers. Later we discuss the
effects of heavy vehicles on trafﬁc ﬂow.

Strengths and Weaknesses

    This model is easy to implement, the mathematics behind it is quite sim-
ple, and it is backed by the National Transportation Board. We establish its
reliability by using it to predict trafﬁc ﬂow patterns in the 1999 evacuation.

    We assume that the number of lanes does not change, which requires that
there are no lane restrictions throughout the length of the freeway and no lanes
are added or taken away by construction.

    The major weakness of our model is that it fails to take into account the
erratic behavior of people under the strain of a natural disaster.

    The simplicity of our model also limits its usefulness. It can be applied only
to normal highway situations, not to a network of roads.

Improving Evacuation Flow

    Gathering data from a various sources, we estimate the number of vehi-
cles used in the 1999 evacuation. According to Dow and Cutter [2000], 65% of
households that were surveyed chose to evacuate. About 70% of households
used one vehicle or fewer, leaving 30% of households taking two vehicles. Of
the evacuees, 25% used I-26 during the evacuation. Based on population esti-
mates [County Population Estimates . . . 1999] and average number of people
per household [Estimates of Housing Units . . . 1998], and assuming a rela-
tively uniform distribution of people per household, we calculate the number
of vehicles used during the evacuation (Table 1).
304 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                          Table 1.
Evacuation participation estimates for Hurricane Floyd, in thousands.

          Population Evacuees Evacuating Vehicles Vehicles

                                  Households       on I-26

Southern  187  122                47          61   --

Central   553  359                139         181  --

Northern  233  152                59          76   --

Total     973  632                245         319  61

Reversing Lanes

    According to our model, the capacity of a highway is directly proportional
to the number of lanes. This implies that lane reversal would nearly double
the capacity of I-26.

    Approximately 319,000 vehicles were used to evacuate the coastal counties
of South Carolina. Of evacuees surveyed by Dow and Cutter [2000], 16.3%
evacuated between noon and 3 p.m. on Sept. 14. Assuming independence
between the above factors, in the hours between 9 a.m. and noon, I-26 must
have been clogged by an attempted inﬂux of about 3,300 vehicles/h. Even
if evenly distributed, this was more than the 3,200 vehicles/h that the two
Columbia-bound lanes of I-26 could take under evacuation conditions. The
result was LOS F--a large trafﬁc jam. Our model predicts that this jam would
have lingered for hours, even after the inﬂux of vehicles had died down.

    What if the coastal-bound lanes of I-26 were reversed? With corrections for
nonideal conditions, our model predicts an SFE of 6,000 pcphpl. Therefore,
reversing the lanes of I-26 has the potential to increase service ﬂow rate by a
factor of 1.6.

Simultaneous Evacuation Strategies

By Hurricane Path

    Hurricanes sweep from south to north. Because a hurricane commonly
travels at a speed of less than 30 mph, the southernmost counties of South
Carolina would be affected at least two hours before the northernmost ones.

    However, analysis indicates that a staggered evacuation strategy would not
improve the speed of the evacuation. The evacuation routes are largely par-
allel to one another and rarely intersect. Thus, the evacuation of each county
should affect only the trafﬁc on evacuation routes of nearby counties. There-
fore, postponing evacuation of counties farther from the hurricane would be
counterproductive.
                                                                      Jammin' with Floyd 305

By County

    What about avoiding simultaneous evacuation of adjacent counties? We
recommend evacuating Jasper, Beaufort, Charleston, Georgetown, and Horry
counties in the ﬁrst wave, and leaving Hampton, Colleton, Dorchester, and
Berkeley until 3≠6 h later, depending on the time of day. This solution would
decrease the probability of trafﬁc reaching LOS F on any highway without
signiﬁcantly delaying the evacuation. The nearby state of Virginia has a similar
plan for evacuating county by county [Virginia Hurricane . . . 1991].

By License Plate Number

    By dividing cars into two categories, depending on the parity of the last
digit on their license plate, we could separate trafﬁc into two waves without
giving preference to residents of any county. Our solution would request that
the even group evacuate 3≠6 h after the odd group was given the evacuation
order. This would spread out the hours of peak evacuation trafﬁc, resulting
in improved trafﬁc conditions and decreased risk of LOS F being reached. A
comparison of Figures 1 and 2 demonstrates the change in time distribution
of evacuation when half of the drivers evacuate six hours later. Clearly, the
distribution is much smoother, reducing the likelihood of reaching LOS F.

Figure 1. Hurricane Floyd: Fraction of evacuating population vs. hours after the 1999 mandatory
evacuation order. (Data from Dow and Cutter [2000].)

Figure 2. Even/odd license plate plan: Our projected fraction of the evacuating population vs.
hours after the mandatory evacuation order.
306 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Lane Reversal on Smaller Highways

    As only 29% of evacuees took I-26 or I-95, the majority took smaller roads
inland. Because our model results in linear growth of ﬂow with number of
available lanes, lane reversals should improve evacuation rates on all roads.
Because the evacuation routes are nearly perpendicular to the coastline, there
is little risk of opposing trafﬁc being disrupted by these reversals. The logistics
of such an action, however, might be prohibitive.

    The number of personnel needed to facilitate the I-26 lane reversal is 206
[South Carolina Emergency Preparedness Division 2000]. Smaller highways
have less distance between exits, which suggests that more personnel per mile
would be needed to blockade highway entrances. The total length of highway
on all evacuation routes is approximately ten times as great as the length of
I-26. Therefore, a truly prodigious amount of human effort would be necessary
to implement lane reversals on all evacuation routes.

    It would be imprudent to spend resources for what we estimate to be only
a marginal gain in actual highway use. According to Dow and Cutter [2000],
these alternative routes did not even approach capacity during the last evacua-
tion. Since our license-plate evacuation strategy increases the overall through-
put of major evacuation routes through lane reversal and smoother time distri-
bution, there is no reason to expect a heavier load on state and country roads.

    So, there is little evidence to support the utility of lane reversal on all smaller
roads. Still, reversing lanes on a small number of evacuation routes might prove
useful. The three major population centers of the coast (Beaufort, Charleston,
and Horry counties) have different evacuee distributions. Therefore, those
highways which most merit reversal are I-26, I-501 from Myrtle Beach to Marion
and 301 from Marion to Florence, and the southern corridor from Beaufort
County to the Augusta area.

Effect of Additional Temporary Shelters

    In 1999, South Carolina housed about 325,000 people in shelters [Dow and
Cutter 2000]. In a hurricane, one-third of evacuees go to each of shelters, family
and friends, and commercial establishments [Zelinski and Kosinski 1991, 39≠
44]. According to South Carolina Hurricane Information [2001], the number
of predesignated shelters in Columbia is insigniﬁcant. However, there must
be an efﬁcient way to funnel the evacuees to the evacuation sites, such as a
central coordination center with an up-to-date list of where the next group of
cars should go.

Vehicle Type Restrictions

    Although our model generally calculates ﬂow using only normal passenger
cars, it is not difﬁcult to take other types of vehicles into account. The equation
                  Jammin' with Floyd 307

used to calculate the heavy-vehicle adjustment factor is

1
fHV = 1 + 0.6P ,                                          (3)

where P is the proportion of nonpassenger vehicles (RVs, trailers, and boats).
    Using this equation, our model predicts an upper bound on the proportion

of nonpassenger vehicles that occur without causing LOS F. We demonstrate
this with a sample calculation using I-26. Earlier, we estimated the SFE of I-26,
including reversed lanes, as 6,000 pcphpl. We also estimated that a maximum of
3,300 vehicles/h would enter I-26, ignoring the possibility of spikes in activity.
Therefore, the minimum safe value of fHV is approximately 0.55, which means
that I-26 has enough leeway to support any mix of passenger cars and heavy
vehicles. There is no need to restrict large vehicles on I-26.

Georgians, Floridians, and the I-95 Corridor

    According to Georgia's hurricane evacuation plan [Hurricane Evacuation
Routes 2001], I-95 is not a valid evacuation route. However, thousands of
Floridians and Georgians ﬂocked north on I-95 during Hurricane Floyd. In
Savannah, the most popular evacuation route was I-16, which goes directly
away from South Carolina [Ofﬁcials deserve high marks . . . 1999]. In South
Carolina, as shown in Figures 1 and 2, the farther away the destination, the
smaller the percentage of the evacuee population that plans to go there. Taking
all this into account, a realistic upper bound for the percentage of Georgians or
Floridians using I-95 is 20%.

    Any population entering South Carolina on I-95 from Georgia or Florida is
mostly bound for major cities; an upper bound on the trafﬁc headed through
Columbia would be 75%. Since Floyd's landfall was extraordinarily unpre-
dictable, we propose that it was one of the largest evacuations that will affect
South Carolina.

    Our reasoning is as follows: Hurricanes of lesser strength have fewer evac-
uees. If the landfall of the hurricane is more southerly, there is less need to
evacuate South Carolina and North Carolina and so there will be less trafﬁc on
the I-26. Lastly, if the hurricane tends more towards the north, the number of
evacuee drivers from Georgia and Florida taing I-95 will be decreased greatly.
So, we can take Floyd as a relative upper bound on evacuees.

    From CNN's coverage of the lead up to Hurricane Floyd's landfall, in Geor-
gia, we know that "the evacuation orders affected 500,000 people." We bound
this rough estimate by 600,000. So the upper bound of people using I-95 can be
estimated as (0.20)(0.75)(600,000)  90,000, or about 45,000 vehicles, spread
over a two-day period. From Dow and Cutter [2000], we know that about 10%
of South Carolina evacuees used I-95, so the Georgians and Floridians effec-
tively doubled the trafﬁc on I-95, which is a huge impact on the model that we
have proposed.
308 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Improvements in the Model

    Our model needs additional evacuation data. With precise statistics regard-
ing number of evacuees, routes taken, time distributions, and trafﬁc conditions,
we could apply it to a greater variety of situations.

    Additional reﬁnements might be made to the parameters of the model with
information on the highways themselves. The lane widths and distances to
roadside obstacles affect the service ﬂow rate, and knowing the exact layout of
the highways would enable us to take them into account.

    We could also use information regarding the resources available to the state:
how many personnel and vehicles would be available to run lane reversals.

    With sufﬁcient information, we could use this model to create a simulation
of a hurricane evacuation. We would treat the highways of South Carolina as
edges in a network ﬂow problem and run a discrete computer simulation to
test our premises and conclusions regarding evacuation policies.

References

County Population Estimates for July 1, 1999. 1999. http://www.census.gov/
    population/estimates/county/co-99-1/99C1_45.txt .

Dow, K., and S.L. Cutter. 2000. South Carolina's Response to Hurricane Floyd.
    Quick Response Report 128. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina.
    http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/qr/qr128/qr128.html .

Estimates of Housing Units, Households, Households by Age of Householder,
    and Persons per Household: July 1, 1998. 1999. http://www.census.gov/
    population/estimates/housing/sthuhh1.txt .

Floyd bashes Bahamas, takes aim at Florida. 1999. http://www.cnn.com/
    WEATHER/9909/14/floyd.07/ .

Gartner, Nathan, Carroll J. Messer, and Ajay K. Rathi. 1992. Trafﬁc Flow Theory:
    A State of the Art Report. Revised monograph. Special Report 165. Oak
    Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National Laboratory. http://www.tfhrc.gov/its/
    tft/tft.htm .

Hurricane Evacuation Routes--Text Form. 2001. http://www.georgia-navigator.
    com/hurricane/textroutes.html .

Mannering, F., and W. Kilareski. 1990. Principles of Highway Engineering and
    Trafﬁc Analysis. New York: Wiley.

Number of Households in South Carolina by County: 1950≠1990 and Projected
    1995. 1996. http://www.sciway.net/statistics/scsa96/hou/hou13.
    html .

Ofﬁcials deserve high marks for handling of Hurricane Floyd threat. 1999.
    http://www.onlineathens.com/stories/091999/ope_0919990026.shtml .
                                          Jammin' with Floyd 309

Public Roads. 1999. http://www.tfhrc.gov/pubrds/janfeb99/traffic.htm .

South Carolina Emergency Preparedness Division. 2000. Trafﬁc Management
    Central Coastal Conglomerate Annex I-26 Lane Reversal Operation Plan.
    Formerly available at http://www.state.sc.us/epd/hurricaneplan/
    ccci26rev.pdf ; now at http://www.cs.hmc.edu/~matt/ccc.pdf .

South Carolina Hurricane Evacuation Routes. 2001. http://www.dot.state.
    sc.us/getting/evacuationmap.pdf .

South Carolina Hurricane Information. 2000.
    http://www.scan21.com/selectcounty.html .

South Carolina Population Density. 1999. http://www.callsouthcarolina.
    com/Maps/Map-Pop_Density.htm .

Total Number of Housing Units by County: 1970, 1980 and 1990. 1999.
    http://www.ors.state.sc.us/abstract_99/chap12/hou3.htm .

Transportation Research Board. 1985. Highway Capacity Manual. Special Report
    209.

Virginia Hurricane Evacuation Routes. 1991. http://www.vdot.state.va.
    us/traf/hurricane.html .

Zelinsky, Wilbur, and Leszek A. Kosinski. 1991. The Emergency Evacuation
    of Cities: A Cross-National Historical and Geographical Study. Savage, MD:
    Rowman and Littleﬁeld.

Maurice Knocks on Door, No One Home

      Columbia, S.C. (AP)-- Hurri-            The RAD Corporation's team of
cane season has come with a fury here     world-class hurricane experts and top-
to South Carolina, where Hurricane        notch trafﬁc engineers analyzed the
Maurice, the 13th named storm of the      situation and developed a new evacu-
season, bears down on Charleston this     ation plan. "The basic idea of the plan
evening. A record 80% of the popula-      stems from simple math," explained
tion has been evacuated through the       Dr. K. Esner, Director of RAD Mod-
new evacuation plan.                      eling. "Two sets of two lanes almost
                                          doubles the evacuation rate."
    When Hurricane Floyd narrowly
missed South Carolina in 1999, the            When asked to explain further,
lack of preparedness for an evacuation    Dr. Esner continued, "On I-26, where
of such a magnitude was highly evi-       there was a colossal trafﬁc jam in 1999,
dent. The state government asked the      we decided to reverse the ﬂow of the
Research All Day Corporation (RAD         coastal-bound lanes at the ﬁrst deci-
Corp.) to come up with a new evacu-       sion of a mandatory evacuation." In
ation plan that would help the coastal    this way, people leaving Charleston,
residents escape the ferocity of a simi-  the most populous city in South Car-
lar storm.                                olina, could take either the normal two
310 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

lanes of I-26 or the two "contra-ﬂow"     ically or basically divide the popu-
(reversed) lanes of I-26 all the way to   lation right down the middle, using
Columbia.                                 even/odd license plate numbers."

    The evacuees in the many                  With the proposed RAD plan, peo-
Columbia shelters seemed in good          ple with even license plates left in the
spirits. There was much less trafﬁc-      ﬁrst group, right when the evacua-
related annoyance than was felt in        tion order was given, and people with
1999. John C. Lately, a British resident  odd license plates or vanity plates left
of Myrtle Beach, joked, "You realize      starting 6 hours later. "I thought the
that in England, driving on the left is   plan was crazy," remarked Charles Or-
commonplace; I felt right at home."       ange, a 24-year-old Charleston resi-
                                          dent. "They told us to evacuate by li-
    There was nothing but praise for      cense plate number; you'd never think
the RAD engineers. "A remarkable          high school math would help you one
difference was seen between the chaos     day, but this is one time it did!" he
of evacuating for hurricane Floyd         exclaimed.
in 1999 and the evacuation today,"
said Joseph P. Riley, Jr., mayor of           Using the 1999 data, the RAD re-
Charleston. "This time, the drive be-     searchers calculated that breaking the
tween Charleston and Columbia took        evacuating population into two equal
4 hours instead of 18. And it's a good    groups and delaying one group by 6
thing, too; this time the storm didn't    hours led to a condition where the vol-
miss."                                    ume of cars at no time exceeded the
                                          maximum volume that the road could
    Another feature of the new evacua-    handle. In this way, there was no prob-
tion plan was the breakup of the evac-    lem with trafﬁc jams, and Charleston
uating public into two groups. "One       became a ghost town, safe for Maurice
of our concerns about the 1999 Floyd      to make its appearance.
evacuation was the volume of cars all
trying to access the emergency roads          The majority of the people left on
at the same time," explained Dr. Esner.   the beaches are surfers and media, but
He continued, "To alleviate the trafﬁc    even they are sparse in number; all
volume pressure, we wanted to divide      that remains is a hurricane without an
the population into two groups. We        audience.
had two different proposals; we could
break up the population geograph-             Hurricane Maurice could not be
                                          reached for comment.

-- Christopher Hanusa, Ari Nieh, Matthew Schnaider, in Claremont, Calif.
                                                                      Blowin' in the Wind 311

Blowin' in the Wind

Mark Wagner
Kenneth Kopp
William E. Kolasa

Lawrence Technological University
Southﬁeld, MI

Advisor: Ruth G. Favro

Introduction

    We present a model to determine the optimal evacuation plan for coastal
South Carolina in the event of a large hurricane. The model simulates the
ﬂow of trafﬁc on major roads. We explored several possible evacuation plans,
comparing the time each requires.

    Trafﬁc ﬂow can be signiﬁcantly improved by reversing the eastbound lanes
of I-26 from Charleston to Columbia. By closing the interchange between I-26
and I-95 and restricting access to I-26 at Charleston, we can reduce the overall
evacuation time from an original 31 h to 13 h.

    However, a staggered evacuation plan, which evacuates the coastline county
by county, does not improve the evacuation time, since trafﬁc from each coastal
population center interferes little with trafﬁc ﬂowing from other areas being
evacuated. Although reversing trafﬁc on other highways could slightly im-
prove trafﬁc ﬂow, it would be impractical. Restrictions on the number and
types of vehicles could speed up the evacuation but would likely cause more
problems than improvements.

Theory of Trafﬁc Flow

    We require a model that simulates trafﬁc ﬂow on a large scale rather than
individual car movement. We take formulas to model trafﬁc ﬂow from Beltrami
[1998]. Although trafﬁc is not evenly distributed along a segment of road, it
can be modeled as if it were when large segments of road are being considered.
We can measure the trafﬁc density of a section of road in cars/mi. The trafﬁc

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 311≠321. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
312 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

speed u at a point on the road can be calculated from the density according to

the formula                       1- 
                                       m
             u(r) = um                    ,

where  is the trafﬁc density, um is the maximum speed of any car on the road,
and m is the maximum trafﬁc density (with no space between cars). We deﬁne
the ﬂow of trafﬁc at a point on the road as the number of cars passing that point
in a unit of time. The ﬂow q can be easily calculated as

             q() = u.

It is the ﬂow of trafﬁc that we desire to optimize, since greater ﬂow results in a
greater volume of trafﬁc moving along a road.

Assumptions

∑ During an evacuation, there is an average of 3 people per car. This is rea-
  sonable, since people evacuate with their entire families, and the average
  household in South Carolina has 2.7 people, according to the 1990 census.

∑ The average length of a car on the road is about 16 ft.

∑ In a trafﬁc jam, there is an average of 1 ft of space between cars.

∑ The two above assumptions lead to a maximum trafﬁc density of

             5280 ft/mile  =  310  cars/mile/lane.
               17 ft/car

∑ The maximum speed is 60 mph on a 4-lane divided highway, 50 mph on a
  2-lane undivided country road.

∑ Vehicles follow natural human tendencies in choosing directions at intersec-
  tions, such as preferring larger highways and direct routes.

∑ The trafﬁc ﬂow of evacuees from Florida and Georgia on I-95 is a continuous
  stream inward to South Carolina.

∑ When vehicles leave the area of the model, they are considered safely evac-
  uated and no longer need to be tracked.

∑ There will not be trafﬁc backups on the interstates at the points at which they
  leave the area of the model.

∑ A maximum of 30 cars/min can enter or exit a 1-mi stretch of road in a pop-
  ulated area, by means of ramps or other access roads. Up to the maximum
  exit rate, all cars desiring to exit a highway successfully exit.
                                                Blowin' in the Wind 313

∑ The weather does not affect trafﬁc speeds. The justiﬁcations are:

     ≠ During the early part of the evacuation, when the hurricane is far from
        the coast, there is no weather to interfere with trafﬁc ﬂowing at the
        maximum speed possible.

     ≠ During the later part of the evacuation, when the hurricane is approach-
        ing the coast, trafﬁc ﬂows sufﬁciently slowly that storm weather would
        not further reduce the speed of trafﬁc.

∑ There is sufﬁcient personnel available for any reasonable tasks.

Objective Statement

    We measure the success of an evacuation plan by its ability to evacuate
all lives from the endangered areas to safe areas between announcement of
mandatory evacuation and landfall of the hurricane; the best evacuation plan
takes the shortest time.

Model Design

The Trafﬁc Simulator

    Our trafﬁc simulator is based on the formulas above. Both space and time
are discretized, so that the roads are divided into 1-mi segments and time is
divided into 1-min intervals. Vehicles enter roads at on-ramps in populated
areas, leave them by off-ramps, and travel through intersections to other roads.

    Each 1-mi road segment has a density (the number of cars on that segment),
a speed (mph), and a ﬂow (the maximum number of cars that move to the
next 1-mile segment in 1 min). Each complete road section has a theoretical
maximum density m and a practical maximum density m (accounting for 1 ft
of space between cars), which can never be exceeded.

Moving Trafﬁc Along a Single Road

The ﬂow for each road segment is calculated as

q()  =  u
            .
        um

If the following road segment is unable to accommodate this many cars, the
ﬂow is the maximum number of cars that can move to the next segment.
314 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Moving Trafﬁc Through Intersections

    When trafﬁc reaches the end of a section of road and arrives at an inter-
section, it must be divided among the exits of the intersection. For each inter-
section, we make assumptions about percentages of cars taking each direction,
based on the known road network, the capacities of the roads, and natural hu-
man tendencies. If a road ends at an intersection with no roads leading out (i.e.,
the state border), there is assumed to be no trafﬁc backup; trafﬁc ﬂow simply
continues at the highest rate possible, and the simulation keeps track of the
number of cars that have left the model.

    Conﬂicts occur when more cars attempt to enter a road section at an inter-
section than that road section can accommodate. Consider a section of road
that begins at an intersection. Let:

 qmax = m -  = the maximum inﬂux of cars the road can accommodate at the
   intersection,

q1, . . . , qn = the ﬂows of cars entering the road at an intersection, and

qin = qi = the total ﬂow of cars attempting to enter the road at the intersec-
  tion.

If qin > qmax, then we adjust the ﬂow of cars entering the road from its

entrance roads as follows:         qi
                                   qin
                            qi  =       qmax.

Therefore, qi is the number of cars entering the road from road i. The ﬂow of
trafﬁc allowed in from each road is distributed according to the ﬂow trying to

enter from each road. Clearly, qi = qmax.

Simulating Populated Areas

    A section of road that passes through a populated area has cars enter and
leave by ramps or other access roads. We assume that the maximum ﬂow of
trafﬁc for an access ramp is 30 cars/min. We estimate the actual number of cars
entering and leaving each road segment based on the population of the area.

    Cars cannot enter a road if its maximum density has been reached. For
simplicity, however, we assume that cars desiring to exit always can, up to the
maximum ﬂow of 30 cars/min per exit ramp.

    We desire to know how the population of each populated area changes
during the evacuation, so that we can determine the time required. Therefore,
we keep track of the population in the areas being evacuated, Columbia, and
certain other cities in South Carolina. If all people have been evacuated from
an area, no more enter the road system from that area.

    Areas do not have to be evacuated immediately when the simulation starts.
Each area may be assigned an evacuation delay, during which normal trafﬁc is
simulated. Once the delay has passed, trafﬁc in the area assumes its evacuation
behavior.
                                                                     Blowin' in the Wind 315

Completing an Evacuation

    The six coastal counties of South Carolina (where Charleston includes the
entire Charleston area) and the roads leading inland from these areas must be
evacuated. When the population of these areas reaches zero, and the average
trafﬁc density along the roads is less than 5 cars/mi, the evacuation is complete
and the simulation terminates.

Implementing the Model

    We implemented the model described above in a computer program written
in C++. The logic for the main function is as follows: For each road, we let trafﬁc
exit, resolve trafﬁc at intersections, move trafﬁc along the rest of the road, and
ﬁnally let cars enter the road. We loop until the evacuation is complete.

    Trafﬁc ﬂow is considered simultaneous; the trafﬁc ﬂow along every road is
determined before trafﬁc densities are updated. However, exits occur ﬁrst and
entrances last, to accurately simulate trafﬁc at access ramps.

Model Results

Simulating the 1999 Evacuation

    To simulate the evacuation of 1999, we prepared a simpliﬁed map that in-
cludes the interstates, other the 4-lane divided highways, and some 2-lane un-
divided roads. We simulated the evacuation of the coastal counties--Beaufort,
Jasper, Colleton, Georgetown, and Horry (including Myrtle Beach)--and the
Charleston metro area. The inland areas we considered are Columbia, Spar-
tanburg, Greenville, Augusta, Florence, and Sumter. In addition, we simulated
large amounts of trafﬁc from farther south entering I-95 N from the Savannah
area. A map of the entire simulation is shown in Figure 1.

    The results of running this simulation with conditions similar to those of the
actual evacuation produced an evacuation time of 31 h to get everyone farther
inland than I-95. This is signiﬁcantly greater than the actual evacuation time
and completely unacceptable. The increase in time can be explained by two
features of the actual evacuation that are missing in the simulation:

∑ Only 64% of the population of Charleston left when the mandatory evacu-
   ation was announced [Cutter and Dow 2000; Cutter et al. 2000]; our model
   assumes that everyone leaves.

∑ Late in the day, the eastbound lanes of I-26 were reversed, eliminating the
   congestion.
316 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                                           Figure 1. Map of the simulation.

Simulating Reversal of I-26

    In this simulation, I-26 E was turned into a second 2-lane highway leading
from Charleston to Columbia. The evacuation time was reduced to 19 h. Under
all conditions tested, reversing trafﬁc on the eastbound lanes of I-26 signiﬁcantly
reduces evacuation time.

Simulating a Staggered Evacuation

    A staggered evacuation of the coastal counties of South Carolina, going from
south to north with 1 h delays, decreases the time for evacuation to 15.5 h--
2.5 longer than the best time (described below). This is because the second-
slowest county to evacuate, Horry County, is the northernmost and the last
to evacuate. An analysis of the evacuation routes used reveals why there is
no improvement: The roads for the large counties do not intersect until they
reach Columbia. Given that the evacuation of Charleston County takes 13 h,
the evacuations of the other large counties (Horry and Beaufort) would need
to be advanced or delayed at least this much to have any effect.
                                          Blowin' in the Wind 317

Reversing Other Highways

    Reversing trafﬁc on smaller highways might improve trafﬁc ﬂow, but this
is not a practical option. None of the roads besides I-26 is a controlled-access
road; therefore, it is impossible to ensure that the trafﬁc entering the reversed
lanes would all move in the desired direction. A single vehicle entering and
attempting to travel in the undesired direction would cause a massive jam.

    The possible minor highways to Columbia that could be reversed are U.S.
highways 321, 176, 521, 378, 501, and 21. All are non-controlled-access roads,
meaning that there are no restrictions on where vehicles may exit or enter.
Together, they have 450 mi of roadway. A quick examination of U.S. 501, the
highest-capacity of these, reveals two intersections per mile with other roads.
Considering this as typical, there are 900 intersections outside of towns that
would need to be blocked. Factoring in the no fewer than 60 towns along the
way, the blocking becomes prohibitive.

    Therefore, reversal of minor highways leading inland is not feasible. The
only road that can be feasibly reversed is I-26.

Adding Temporary Shelters to Columbia

    According to our simulation, the population of the Columbia area after the
evacuation (in the best-case scenario) was 1,147,000, a massive number above
the 516,000 permanent residents. If more temporary shelters were established
in Columbia, there would be less trafﬁc leaving the city and therefore more
congestion within the city. This would reduce the rate at which trafﬁc could
enter Columbia and lead to extra trafﬁc problems on the highways leading into
it. The effect of this congestion is beyond our computer simulation.

    We investigated buildings for sheltering evacuees. Using smartpages.com
to search for schools, hotels, and churches in the Columbia area, we found the
numbers of buildings given in Table 1. We assumed an average capacity for
each type of building. According to the table, Columbia can shelter 1,058,251;
this leaves a deﬁcit of 89,000.

                                                           Table 1.
Post-evacuation sheltering in the two counties (Richland and Lexington) that Columbia occupies.

                     Buildings            People sheltered

Type                 in Richland in Lexington Total Per building Number

Permanent residents                              516,251
                                                 176,400
Schools--general *   83         113  196  900
                                                  56,000
Hotels/motels        80         32   112  500    238,500

Churches             568        386  954  250     71,100

Schools--other**     63         16   79   900

                                          Total  1,058,251

*We assume that schools average 600 students and can shelter 900.
**Includes academies but excludes beauty schools, trade schools, driving schools, etc.
318 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    However, Charlotte NC had only a very small increase in population due to
evacuation (from 396,000 to 411,000). The people that Columbia cannot shelter
can easily ﬁnd shelter in Charlotte.

Restricting Vehicle Types and Vehicle Numbers

    Restrictions on numbers and types of vehicles would indeed increase the
speed of the evacuation. However, there are no reliable ways to enforce such
restrictions. Consider the following arguments:

∑ Forbidding camper vehicles may be unsuccessful, since for a sizable fraction
   of tourists the camper is their only vehicle.

∑ Restricting the number of vehicles to one per family:

      ≠ The record-keeping involved would be prohibitive.
      ≠ For some families, more than one vehicle is needed to carry all of the

        family members.

The I-95 Trafﬁc Problem

    We assume that if the interchange is not closed, at least 75% of the people
coming up from Florida and Georgia on I-95 will take I-26 to Columbia. This is
because the next major city reachable from I-95 is Raleigh, 150 mi further on. In
our simulation, not closing this intersection (but keeping the eastbound lanes
of I-26 reversed) increases the evacuation time to 19 h.

The Best Simulated Evacuation Plan

    By altering various model parameters, we reduced the overall evacuation
time to 13 h:

∑ Reverse the eastbound lanes of I-26.

∑ Close the exit on I-95 N leading to I-26 W.

∑ Limit the ﬂow of trafﬁc from Charleston to I-26 W.

    The third item is necessary to reduce congestion along I-26 in the Charleston
area. If too many cars are allowed on, the speed of trafﬁc in Charleston drops
signiﬁcantly. Although this unlimited access results in a greater average speed
on the section of I-26 between Charleston and the I-95 interchange, the slow-
down in the Charleston area is exactly the type of backup that caused complaints
in 1999 and resulted in a greater total time to evacuate the city.
                                                                     Blowin' in the Wind 319

Conclusions

    It is possible to evacuate coastal South Carolina in 13 h. Assuming that a
hurricane watch is issued 36 h prior to landfall, the state can allow an ample
delay between voluntary evacuation announcement and a subsequent manda-
tory order. However, state agencies must take considerable action to ensure
that the evacuation will go as planned:

∑ Close the interchange between I-26 and I-95. Trafﬁc on I-26 must remain on
   I-26; trafﬁc on I-95 must remain on I-95.

∑ The two eastbound lanes of I-26 must be reversed immediately upon the
   mandatory evacuation order.

∑ In Charleston, restrict entrance to I-26 to 15 cars/min at each entrance ramp.

Everyone in the areas to evacuate must be notiﬁed. Within South Carolina, the
existing Emergency Alert System includes many radio stations that can inform
the public of the incoming hurricane, the steps to take during evacuation, and
which roads to use.

    Residents must be more convinced to evacuate than they were during Hur-
ricane Floyd. Appropriate measures must be taken to ensure that residents
evacuate and evacuate far enough inland.

Model Strengths and Weaknesses

Strengths

    The model's predictions have a number of features found in a real evacua-
tion or other high-density trafﬁc ﬂow:

∑ An initial congested area around the entrance ramps gives way to a high-ﬂow
   area when there is no entering trafﬁc.

∑ Overall trafﬁc speed in high-ﬂow areas is around 35 mph.

∑ Merging trafﬁc causes a major decrease in ﬂow.

Weaknesses

    The model does not take into account

∑ city streets, which are important in moving people from the highways to
   shelter in Columbia.

∑ accidents. A single accident or breakdown could result in several hours of
   delay. Tow trucks should be stationed at regular intervals along major roads.
320 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

∑ local trafﬁc on the non-controlled-access highways, which would slow traf-
   ﬁc on those roads.

References

Beltrami, Edward. 1998. Mathematics for Dynamic Modeling. 2nd ed. San Diego,
    CA: Academic.

City of Myrtle Beach: Frequently Asked Questions. 2000.
    http://www.cityofmyrtlebeach.com/faq.html . Accessed 12 February
    2001.

Compton's Encyclopedia Online, vol. 3.0. South Carolina.
    http://www.comptons.com/encyclopedia/ARTICLES/0150/01710336_A.
    html . The Learning Company., Inc. Accessed 12 February 2001.

Cutter, Susan L., and Kirstin Dow. 2000. University of South Carolina: Quick
    Response Report 128: South Carolina's Response to Hurricane Floyd.
    http://www.cla.sc.edu/geog/hrl/Quick%20Response%20Report.htm .
    Accessed 12 February 2001.

            , Robert Oldendick, and Patrice Burns. 2000. University of South Car-
    olina: Preliminary Report 1: South Carolina's Evacuation Experience with
    Hurricane Floyd. http://www.cla.sc.edu/geog/hrl/Floyd_evacuation.
    html . Accessed 10 February 2001.

Emergency Response Planning and Management, Inc. 2000. Assessment of
    South Carolina's experience with the 1999 hurricane season. http://www.
    state.sc.us/epd/HurrBrief.pdf . Accessed 9 February 2001.

Rand McNally Road Atlas: United States, Canada, Mexico. 1995. Skokie, IL: Rand
    McNally & Company.

smartpages.com .

South Carolina Asset Network. http://www.scan21.com/hurricane_main.
    html . Accessed 9 February 2001.

U.S. Army: Hurricane/Tropical Storm Classiﬁcation Scale. http://www.sam.
    usace.army.mil/op/opr/hurrclss.htm . Accessed 10 February 2001.

U.S. Census Bureau: South Carolina Proﬁles (from the 1990 census). http:
    //www.census.gov/datamap/www/45.html . Accessed 10 February 2001.

U.S. Census Bureau: Georgia Proﬁles (from the 1990 census). http://www.
    census.gov/datamap/www/13.html . Accessed 12 February 2001.
                                          Blowin' in the Wind 321

Students Develop Optimal
Coastal Evacuation Plan

    Southfield, Mich., Feb. 12--          within 13 hours, using a computer
During September 13≠15, 1999, Hurri-      simulation of their own design. The
cane Floyd threatened landfall along      plan involves the reversal of the two
the coast of South Carolina. In re-       coastal-bound lanes on Interstate 26
sponse to weather advisories and a        (the main east-west highway), as well
mandatory evacuation order from the       as trafﬁc control and detours through-
governor, hundreds of thousands of        out the major roads heading inland.
people simultaneously attempted to
evacuate the coastal regions including        The students' plan guides the mass
Charleston and Myrtle Beach, causing      trafﬁc ﬂow to areas the students felt
unprecedented trafﬁc jams along ma-       were capable of sheltering large num-
jor highways. Although the evacu-         bers of evacuees. The main destina-
ation was successful in that no lives     tion was Columbia, the capital and
were lost (largely since Floyd did not    largest inland city in South Carolina.
have as great an impact in the ex-        Other destinations were Spartanburg,
pected area), the evacuation was a fail-  Florence, Sumter, and Greenville in
ure in that it was not executed quickly   South Carolina; Augusta in Georgia;
nor completely enough to ensure the       and Charlotte in North Carolina. The
safety and well-being of all evacuating   plan also accounted for the possibil-
citizens had Hurricane Floyd made         ity of very heavy trafﬁc coming north-
landfall in the Charleston area.          ward from Georgia and Florida on I-
                                          95, ﬂeeing from the same hurricane,
    Since that problematic evacuation     which could adversely affect the evac-
in 1999, state ofﬁcials have been work-   uation in South Carolina.
ing on plans for a safe, efﬁcient evac-
uation of the South Carolina coast,           Additionally, the students set forth
preparing for the event that a hur-       plans to shelter the more than 1 million
ricane like Floyd threatens the coast     people who would be in Columbia af-
again. They posed the problem to          ter the evacuation is complete. By
teams of mathematicians all over the      making use of all the city's schools,
country.                                  hotels, motels, and churches as shel-
                                          ters, nearly all the evacuees could be
    After working for four days, a        sheltered. The few remaining evac-
group of talented students evolved        uees could easily ﬁnd shelter north in
a speciﬁc plan to safely and quickly      Charlotte, which in 1999 received few
evacuate every coastal county in South    evacuees.
Carolina (nearly 1 million people)

-- Mark Wagner, Kenneth Kopp, and William E. Kolasa in Southﬁeld, Mich.
322 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)
                                                                     Please Move Quickly 323

Please Move Quickly and Quietly

to the Nearest Freeway

Corey R. Houmand
Andrew D. Pruett
Adam S. Dickey

Wake Forest University
Winston-Salem, NC

Advisor: Miaohua Jiang

Introduction

    We construct a model that expresses total evacuation time for a given route
as a function of car density, route length, and number of cars on the route. When
supplied values for the last two variables, this function can be minimized to
give an optimal car density at which to evacuate.

    We use this model to compare strategies and ﬁnd that any evacuation plan
must ﬁrst and foremost develop a method of staggering trafﬁc ﬂow to create a
constant and moderate car density. This greatly decreases the evacuation time
as well as congestion problems.

    If an even speedier evacuation is necessary, we found that making I-26 one-
way would be effective. Making other routes one-way or placing limits on the
type or number of cars prove to be unnecessary or ineffective.

    We also conclude that other trafﬁc on I-95 would have a negligible impact
on the evacuation time, and that shelters built in Columbia would improve
evacuation time only if backups were forming on the highways leading away
from the city.

Prologue

    As Locke asserted [1690], power is bestowed upon the government by the
will of the people, namely to protect their property. A government that cannot
provide this, such as South Carolina during an act of God as threatening as
Hurricane Floyd and his super-friends, is in serious danger of revolutionary

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2001) 323≠336. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
324 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

overthrow by the stranded masses marching from the highways to the capitol.
Therefore, South Carolina must ﬁnd the most effective evacuation program--
one that not only provides for the safety of its citizens but also allows for
households to rescue as many of their vehicles (read: property) as possible.
Pitted against the wrath of God and Nature, one can only hope the power of
mathematical modeling can protect the stability of South Carolinian bureau-
cracy.

    Since the goal is to create a useful model that even an elected ofﬁcial can use,
our model operates most effectively on the idea that government agencies are
poor at higher-level math but good at number-crunching. Our model provides
a clear, concise formula for weighing relative total evacuation times and likely
individual trip times. This is crucial in deciding how to order a wide-area
evacuation while maintaining public approval of the operation and preventing
a coup d'e¥tat.

    Our model shows that of the four strategies for evacuation suggested by the
problem statement, staggering evacuation orders is always the most effective
choice rather than simply reversing I-26. After that, applying any one of the
other options, like lane reversal on I-26 and/or on secondary evacuation routes,
can improve the evacuation plan. However, using more than one of these
techniques results in a predicted average driver speed in excess of the state
speed limit of 70 mph.

    Of the three additional methods, we ﬁnd that the most effective is to make
I-26 one-way during peak evacuation times. Implementing the same plan on
secondary highways would require excessive manpower from law enforcement
ofﬁcials, and regulating the passenger capacity is too difﬁcult a venture in a
critical situation.

    We also ﬁnd that, given the simpliﬁcations of the model, I-95 should have
a negligible effect.

    Furthermore, the construction of shelters in Columbia would facilitate the
evacuation only if the highways leading away from Columbia were causing
backups in the city.

Analysis of the Problem

    To explain the massive slowdowns on I-26 during the 1999 evacuation, our
team theorized that substantially high vehicle density causes the average speed
of trafﬁc to decrease drastically. Our principal goal is to minimize evacuation
times for the entire area by maximizing highway throughput, that is, the highest
speed at which the highest density of trafﬁc can travel. Given this fact, we seek
to ﬁnd the relationships between speed, car density, and total evacuation time.
                                              Please Move Quickly 325

Assumptions

    To restrict our model, we assume that all evacuation travel uses designated
evacuation highways.

    We assume that trafﬁc patterns are smoothly and evenly distributed and
that drivers drive as safely as possible. There are no accidents or erratically
driving "weavers" in our scenario. This is perhaps our weakest assumption,
since this is clearly not the case in reality, but it is one that we felt was necessary
to keep our model simple.

    Our model also requires that when unhindered by obstacles, drivers travel
at the maximum legal speed. Many drivers exceed the speed limit; however, we
do not have the information to model accurately the effects of unsafe driving
speeds, and a plan designed for the government should avoid encouraging
speeding.

    As suggested by the problem, we simplify the actual distribution of popu-
lation across the region placing 500,000 in Charleston, 200,000 in Myrtle Beach,
and an even distribution of the remaining approximately 250,000 people.

    Multiple-lane highways and highway interchanges are likely to be more
complicated than our approximation, but we simplify these aspects so that our
model will be clear and simple enough to be implemented by the government.

    Distribution of trafﬁc among the interstate and secondary highways in our
model behaves according to the results of a survey, which indicates that 20%
of evacuees chose to use I-26 for some part of their trip.

The Model

    We begin by modeling the trafﬁc of I-26 from Charleston to Columbia, as
we believe that understanding I-26 is the key to solving the trafﬁc problems.

    We derived two key formulas, the ﬁrst s() describing speed as a function
of car density and the second e() describing the total evacuation time as a
function of car density:

s() = 1 5280 - l - b ,                   e()  =  L + N
            k                                     s() .

The constants are:
k = braking constant,
l = average length of cars in feet, and
b = buffer zone in feet.
The variables are:
 = car density in cars/mi,
326 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

L = length of highway in feet, and

N = number of cars to be evacuated.

    The method is to maximize e() for a given N and L, which gives us an
optimal car density.

Derivation of the Model

    The massive number of variables associated with modeling trafﬁc on a micro
basis leads to a very complex and difﬁcult problem. Ideally, one could consider
such factors as a driver's experience, his or her psychological proﬁle and current
mood, the condition of the mode of transportation, whether his or her favorite
Beach Boys song was currently playing on the radio, etc. Then one could use a
supercomputer to model the behavior of several hundred thousand individuals
interacting on one of our nation's vast interstate highways. Instead, our model
analyzes trafﬁc on a macro basis.

    The greater the concentration of cars, the slower the speed at which the
individuals can safely drive. What dictates the concentration of cars? Well, the
concentration is clearly related to the distance between cars, since the greater
the distance, the smaller the concentration, and vice versa. On any interstate
highway, drivers allot a certain safe traveling distance between their car and
the car directly in front of them, to allow time to react. Higher speeds require
the same reaction time but consequently a greater safe traveling distance. How
do we determine what the correct distance between cars at a given speed? The
braking distance d of a car is proportional to the square of that car's speed v.
That is, d = kv2 for some constant k. The value for k is 0.0136049 ft-hr2mi2; we
derive this value by ﬁtting ln d = ln k + b ln v with data from Dean et al. [2001];
the ﬁt has r2 = .99999996.

    However, the distance between cars is an awkward measurement to use.
Our goal is to model trafﬁc ﬂow. With our model, we manipulate the trafﬁc ﬂow
until we ﬁnd its optimal value. The distance between cars is hard to control,
but other values, such as the concentration or density of the cars in a given
space, are much easier to control.

    How do we ﬁnd the value of the car density? To start, any distance can be
subdivided into the space occupied by cars and the space between cars. The
space occupied by cars can be assumed to be a multiple of the average car length
l. The space between cars is clearly related to the braking distance, but the two
are not necessarily the same. The braking distance at low speeds (< 10 mph) is
less than a foot. However, ordinary experience reveals that even at standstill
trafﬁc, the distance between cars is still much greater than a foot; drivers still
leave a buffer zone in addition to the safe breaking distance. Then each car has
a space associated with it, given by d + l + b, where b is the average buffer zone
in feet. Since this expression is of the form of 1 car per unit distance, this is in
itself a density. We can also convert this to more useful units, such as cars per
                                                     Please Move Quickly 327

mile:

         =  cars  =  cars  ◊  5280 ft  =    5280  ◊  cars  =              5280     cars .
            mi        ft        mi        d+b+l      mi               kv2 + b + l  mi

Solving for v gives

                           s() = v =      1 5280  -l-b .

                                          k

At this point we can substitute k = 0.0136049 ft ∑ h2/mi2, l = 17 ft (from
researching sizes of cars), and b = 10 ft (from our personal experience) and
graph speed as a function of density (Figure 1).

                           Figure 1. Speed as a function of density.

    Note the maximum density at 195.6 cars/mi. To understand why a maxi-
mum density exists, consider the case b = 0; as v  0, the distance between the
cars approaches zero.

    We now determine how long it takes this group of cars to reach their desti-
nation. For now, we say that the group reaches its goal whenever the ﬁrst car
arrives. This is a simple calculation: We divide the length of the road L by the
average speed of the group

                     t()      =   L    =           L
                                 s()                             .

                                          1 5280 - l - b
                                          k
328 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

                               Figure 2. Evacuation time as a function of density.

We refer to this function as t because it gives the time of the trip. Figure 2 gives
t for I-26 between Charleston and Columbia, which has a length of 117 mi.

    However, the real problem is not simply evacuating one group of cars, it
is quickly evacuating a large number of cars. Our goal poses an interesting
dilemma: If we evacuate in a stream of low density, they will travel very fast
but evacuation takes an extremely long time. If we evacuate in a stream of very
high car density (which is what happened during Hurricane Floyd), many
people will move at once but they will move very slowly. We must seek the
middle ground.

    We express the total evacuation time as a function of car density; then taking
the minimum gives the optimum car density.

    Unfortunately, the concept of average car density doesn't work as well over
large distances. The problem with trafﬁc ﬂow is that it tends to clump, creating
high car densities and thus low speeds. However, the instantaneous car density
won't vary much for a small distance, such as a mile, compared to the average
car density over the entire highway. To look ahead to the problem: Making
I-26 one-way will certainly help facilitate evacuation, but it won't help nearly
as much as staggering the evacuation ﬂow. Staggering is the only way to
realistically create a constant trafﬁc ﬂow and thus an average car density that
is more or less constant over the entire length of the highway.

    Suppose that we take the N cars that need to be evacuated and subdivide
them into groups, each consisting of the number of cars that there are in 1 mi.
Call these groups packets. Each packet is 1 mi long.

    We look at two cases, one where we send only one group and another where
                           Please Move Quickly 329

we send more than one group. For the ﬁrst case, we assume that all N cars
ﬁt in one packet, so 0 < N < 196, where 196 is the maximum car density for
our values of buffer zone and average car length. Everyone is not technically
evacuated until the end of the packet arrives safely, so we need to add to t()
the additional time for the end of the packet to arrive:

e()  =  t()  +   1
                s() .

We call this expression e because it express total evacuation time as a function
of car density.

    For the second case, we can say that the packets travel like a train, as you
can't release another packet until the ﬁrst packet is a mile away. Evacuation
time is the sum of the time for the ﬁrst packet to arrive plus the time until the
last packet arrives. Since the packets arrive in order, and they are all one mile
long, the time it takes the last packet to arrive is equal to the number of packets
times the time it takes the packets to move 1 mi. The equation is

e()  =  t()  +   1   N  .
                s()  

For one packet, this second equation simpliﬁes to the ﬁrst.
    After some algebra, we arrive at

e()     =  L + N
            s() .

The total evacuation time e is simply a function of three variables: the length
of the highway L, the number of cars N , and the car density . The speed s()
is itself a function of  and three other constants (the braking constant k, the
average car length l, and the buffer zone b). Setting L = 117 and N = 65,000
produces the graph in Figure 3, which has a clear minimum.

Application of the Model

    The model should ﬁrst deal with I-26. We assume that evacuation along this
road takes the longest. We limit our consideration to Charleston, Columbia,
and I-26 between them.

Modeling I-26 Trafﬁc Flow

    The problem states that the evacuation consists of 500,000 residents from
Charleston, 200,000 from Myrtle Beach, and 250,000 others. However, the
model need not evacuate all 950,000. The evacuation rate of 64% for Hurri-
cane Floyd was one of the highest evacuation rates ever seen for a hurricane.
330 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Figure 3. Total evacuation time as a function of density.

Many individuals, whether elderly, ﬁnancially unable to make the trip, or just
darn stubborn remain close to home rather than join the throng of frantic drivers
ﬂeeing for their lives. Further, only about 20% of those who left did so along
Interstate 26. Taking 20% of 64% of 950,000 gives 122,000 as the number of
people that we can expect to evacuate on I-26.

    We must convert number of people to cars, the unit in our model. In South
Carolina there are 3,716,645 people and 1,604,000 households, or 2.3 people per
household. Further research allowed us to ﬁnd the average number of cars
taken for each household. Dow and Cutter [2001] included Table 2 on the
number cars taken by each household.

                                                       Table 2.
Cars taken by each household in 1999 Hurricane Floyd evacuation [Dow and Cutter 2001].

Cars % of households

0                                 3%

1                                 72%

2                                 21%

3+                                4%

    Since the number of households taking more than three cars is merely a
fraction of the 4% of the population evacuating, we assume that a household
takes 0, 1, 2, or 3 cars. Thus, we ﬁnd a weighted average of 1.26 cars/household.
                                              Please Move Quickly 331

We now calculate the average number of people per car:

people = people/household = 1.83.
car     cars/household

    We divide the evacuation population by the average number of people per
car to ﬁnd that 66,655 cars need to be evacuated.

    Both s() and t() are independent of the number of cars to evacuate: s() is
based on highway information that stays constant throughout the model, and
t() is based on the length of the highway. The only function dependent on the
numbers of cars is total evacuation time, e(). Substituting values for b, l, N ,
and L, we arrive at

el() =  117 + 66655                           .

        1              5280
         0.0136049         - 27
                       

After ﬁnding the minimum value, we arrive at

min l = 83 cars/mi,    s = 52 mph,
      t = 2 h 15 min,  el = 18 h.

Our model does not evacuate people very quickly, but there is a signiﬁcant
decrease in average trip time t() for an individual car.

    Our model applies to only one lane of trafﬁc. If cars on I-26 were allowed to
travel in only one lane but at optimal density, the total evacuation time would
be approximately 18 h, with each car making the journey in just over 2 h at an
average speed of 52 mph.

    We assume that adding another highway lane halves the number of cars
per lane and ﬁnd

min l = 73 cars/mi,    s = 58 mph,
      t = 2 h 0 min,   el = 10 h.

    Although the average trip time slightly decreased and speed slightly in-
creased, the most striking result of opening another lane is the halving of total
evacuation time.

    Turning the entire I-26 into one-way trafﬁc turns I-26 into a pair of two-lane
highways rather than a four-lane highway; adding another pair of lanes to our
already existing pair of lanes again halves the number of cars to be evacuated
per lane.

min l = 58 cars/mi,    s = 68 mph,
      t = 1 h 40 min,  el = 6 h.
332 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Conclusions from the I-26 Model

    The problem explicitly mentions four means by which trafﬁc ﬂow may be
improved:

∑ turning I-26 one-way,

∑ staggering evacuation,

∑ turning smaller highways one-way, or

∑ limiting the number or type of cars.

Staggering

    Contrary to the emphasis of the South Carolina Emergency Preparedness
Division (SCEPD), the primary proposal should not be the reversal of south-
bound trafﬁc on I-26 but rather the establishment of a staggering plan. One
glance at the total evacuation time vs. car density graph reveals the great bene-
ﬁts gained from maintaining a constant and moderate car density on the high-
way. The majority of the problems encountered during Hurricane Floyd, such
as the 18-hour trips to Columbia or incidents of cars running out of gas on the
highway, would be solved if a constant car density existed on the highway.

    However, while our model assumes a certain constant car density, it does
not provide a method for producing such density. Therefore, the SCEPD should
produce a plan that staggers the evacuation to maintain a more constant car
density. One proposal was a county-by-county stagger. SCEPD should take
the optimal car density and multiply that by the optimal speed to arrive at an
optimal value of cars/hour. The SCEPD should then arrange the stagger so
that dispersal of cars per hour is as close as possible close to the optimal value.

Making I-26 One-Way

    In addition to the staggering plan, making I-26 one-way reduces the total
evacuation time from 10 h to 6 h. Thus, while staggering should always be
implemented, reversal of trafﬁc on I-26 should supplement the staggering plan
when the SCEPD desires a shorter evacuation time.

The Other Options

    This leaves two more strategies for managing trafﬁc ﬂow: turning smaller
highways one-way and limiting the number or types of car taken per house-
hold. Both of these can be implemented easily in our model. Turning smaller
highways one-way would encourage evacuees to take back roads instead of
I-26, making percentage of evacuees taking I-26 less than 20%, reducing our
                       Please Move Quickly 333

value for N . Restricting the number of cars per household would also reduce
N . Likewise, disallowing large vehicles would reduce l, the average length of
vehicles.

    Considering that the optimal speed calculated after making I-26 one-way is
68 mph, and that adding other evacuation strategies would raise the optimum
average speed above the lawful limit of 70 mph, additional strategies would
be unnecessary.

Adding Myrtle Beach

    The next route needing consideration is 501/I-20 leaving Myrtle Beach, with
200,000 people. Unfortunately, we lack statistics on how many people took the
501/I-20 evacuation route. We can, however, make a guess using a ratio. We
assume that an equal proportion of residents of Myrtle Beach evacuate using
the main route as in Charleston, so that the number taking the highway leaving
a city is directly proportional to the city's size. This suggests that 49,000 people
leave Myrtle Beach in 49,000/1.84 = 26,600 cars, or 13,300 cars/lane. Combining
this with an L = 150 mi, the distance between Myrtle Beach and Columbia, we
can apply our model to arrive at

min l = 46 cars/mi,    s = 80 mph,
      t = 1 h 50 min,  el = 5 h 28 min.

We cap the speed at 70 mph and determine a preferred car density of 56 cars/mi.
This ﬁgure produces a new set of optimal values:

min l = 56 cars/mi,    s = 80 mph,
      t = 2 h,         el = 5 h 30 min.

This calculation also conﬁrms one of our basic assumptions, that I-26 between
Charleston and Columbia is the limiting factor: Evacuation from Myrtle Beach
using two lanes still takes less time (5 h) than evacuation using 4 lanes on I-26
from Charleston (6 h). From this we can conclude that making trafﬁc roads
leading from Myrtle Beach one-way would be unnecessary. We assume that
applying our model to other smaller highways will lead to similar results.

Adding Intersections and I-95

    To simplify the model, we assume that intersecting routes of equal density
contribute trafﬁc to the adjoining route so that the difference in densities always
seeks a balance. Intersections between roads of similar relative density do not
cause unexpected spikes in density on either road. Their effect is therefore
negligible.
334 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    On the case of two interstates of unequal trafﬁc densities, the volume of
trafﬁc on the busier route may cause a substantial change in density on the ad-
joining route. We assume a normalizing tendency at interchanges, so drivers
are not likely to change routes without immediate beneﬁt of higher speed. We
also assume that on interstates over long distances with only intermittent junc-
tions, there is a normalizing tendency of trafﬁc to distribute itself. Therefore,
though I-95 may cause congestion problems, in our model the trafﬁc on I-95
has a negligible effect on the overall evacuation trafﬁc.

Adding Columbia and the Rest of the World

    We view Columbia as a distribution center. Columbia accepts a certain
number of cars per unit of time, dispenses another number of cars per unit of
time to the rest of the world, and retains a certain amount of the trafﬁc that it
receives. In the case of an evacuation, this retention reﬂects evacuees who stay
with families or ﬁnd hotel rooms.

    For example, staggered one-way trafﬁc on I-26 yields optimal car density
to be 58 cars/mi and the optimal speed of 68 mph. Multiplying these yields a
ﬂow of 3,944 cars/h into Columbia.

    If the highways leading to the rest of the world can handle a large trafﬁc
ﬂow in cars per unit time, evacuation time will not be affected. If backups
outside of Columbia are a problem, building more shelters would help because
Columbia would retain more of the incoming trafﬁc. However, if the highways
leading elsewhere can handle the ﬂow, shelters are unnecessary.

Strengths and Weaknesses

    One strength of the model is its formulaic practicality. With reliable mea-
surements of trafﬁc density and speed, the evacuation volume predictions pre-
dictions should be useful.

    A second and more important strength of the model is its use for comparison.
Its prediction can be considered a reference point for experimentation. After
all, we are looking for improvements but not necessarily exact results. The
model offers a range of possible values, and this is an advantage.

    The simpliﬁcations and approximations taken in this model introduce ob-
vious weaknesses, particularly in our concept of car density. In simplifying
trafﬁc ﬂow, we assumed a homogeneity over distance, but this isn't likely to
happen. Much of our model and its derivation hinge on the assumption that
trafﬁc density can be controlled.

    With unconvincing generality, we calculate ranges of average speeds and
assume that all drivers drive as fast and as safely as possible. However, it is
likely that trafﬁc will clump and cluster behind slower drivers.

    A potential source of congestion, intersections, was simpliﬁed by assuming
that relative trafﬁc densities seek a balanced level. In reality, different routes
                                                                     Please Move Quickly 335

are preferred over others and imbalances in trafﬁc density are likely to occur.
    The only way to test the model is to collect data during very heavy trafﬁc.

However, trafﬁc as great as during Hurricane Floyd is rare.
    In short, the weaknesses of the model are primarily related to its simplicity.

However, it is that same simplicity that is its greatest strength.

References

Cutter, Susan L., Kirsten Dow, Robert Oldendick, and Patrice Burns. South
    Carolina's Evacuation Experience with Hurricane Floyd. http://www.cla.
    sc.edu/geog/hrl/Floyd_evac.html . Accessed February 10, 2001.

Dean, Ryan, Drew Morgan, and David Ward. Braking distance of a moving
    car. http://199.88.16.12/~team99b/tech.html . Accessed February 10,
    2001.

Dow, Kirsten, and Susan L. Cutter. South Carolina's Response to Hurricane
    Floyd. http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/qr/qr128/qr128.html . Ac-
    cessed February 10, 2001.

Locke, John. [1690]. Second Treatise On Government. http://www.swan.ac.uk/
    poli/texts/locke/lockcont.htm . Accessed February 12, 2001.

Weiss, Neil, and Matthew Hassett. 1982. Introductory Statistics. Reading, MA:
    Addison-Wesley.

Dr. Ann Watkins, President of the Mathematical Association of America, congratulating MAA
Winner Adam Dickey after he presented the team's model at MathFest in Madison, WI, in August.
[Photo courtesy of Ruth Favro.]
336 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

Mathematical Commission Stream-
lines Hurricane Evacuation Plan

     Columbia, SC, Feb. 12-- As long as        gest that the best way to avoid evacua-
the western coast of Africa stays where it     tion backups is to stagger and sequence
is, global climate patterns will continue to   the county and metropolitan evacuation
have it in for South Carolina. That prover-    orders so that main routes do not exceed
bial "it" is the hurricane season. Some        the critical trafﬁc density that caused the
may point their ﬁngers at God and curse        slowdown.
His ways, but cooler heads will eventually
surrender--shutter their windows, pack              As explained by one member of the
their cars, and drive to Columbia for the      commission, "the model does not get into
next few days, mood unsettled.                 the gritty details of complicated trafﬁc
                                               modeling, but it does present a useful
     However, a report issued from the gov-    framework for evaluating crisis plans and
ernor's ofﬁce earlier this week announced      trafﬁc routing."
that scientists have designed a new plan
for coastal emergency evacuation.                   The solution garnered some skeptical
                                               criticism among mathematics researchers
     Prompted by public disapproval of         state-wide. "The commission is missing
evacuation tactics used during the manda-      the point here," commented one researcher
tory evacuation ordered during Hurricane       at the Hazards Research Lab in the De-
Floyd, the new study sought to ﬁnd the         partment of Geology at the University of
source of the congestion problems that         South Carolina. "The problem with Hur-
left motorists stranded on I-26 for up to      ricane Floyd was an anomalously high rate
18 hours wondering why they even at-           of evacuation among coastal residents--
tempted evacuation at all.                     this is a sociopsychological problem and
                                               not a mathematical one."
     "The government should have known
that we didn't have the roads to get every-         Despite the cool reception, the com-
body out," one Charleston resident com-        mission is conﬁdent in its ﬁndings. Ac-
mented, "and we just had the speed limits      cording to the report, a general stagger-
raised, so I would've expected a quicker       ing of trafﬁc will far exceed the beneﬁts of
escape rout."                                  other methods of congestion control that
                                               have been suggested, such as reversing
     Governor Jim Hodges commissioned          the eastbound lanes of I-26 and some sec-
the evacuation study last Friday, expecting    ondary highways.
a quick response. So far, the results seem
plausible and practical.                            "We ﬁnd that advance planning with a
                                               mind to reduce the trafﬁc surge associated
     The private commission developed a        with quickly ordered mandatory evacua-
mathematical model to describe the traf-       tions is the most useful way to improve
ﬁc ﬂow that caused the backups respon-         evacuations," said a spokesman for the
sible for the evacuation problems. Then,       commission.
by manipulating the model and combining
it with statistical survey data collected af-       Despite the current concerns, the prov-
ter the evacuation, the commission devel-      ing grounds for the ﬁndings of the commis-
oped a report evaluating the various cur-      sion will not surface until this fall, when
rent suggestions to alleviate issues.          the tropical swells off the coast of Africa
                                               begin heading our way again.
     The ﬁndings of the commission sug-

--Corey R. Houmand, Andrew D. Pruett, and Adam S. Dickey in Winston≠
Salem, NC.
                                                                     Judge's Commentary 337

Judge's Commentary:

The Outstanding Hurricane

Evacuation Papers

Mark Parker

Department of Mathematics, Engineering, and Computer Science
Carroll College
Helena, MT 59625
mparker@carroll.edu
http://web.carroll.edu/mparker

Introduction

    Once again, Problem B proved to be quite challenging--both for the stu-
dent teams and for the judges! The students were challenged by a multifaceted
problem with several difﬁcult questions posed, and the judges were challenged
to sort through the wide range of approaches to ﬁnd a small collection of the
best papers. It is worth reminding participants and advisors that Outstand-
ing papers are not without weaknesses and even mathematical or modeling
errors. It is the nature of judging such a competition that we must trade off the
strengths, both technical and expository, of a given paper with its weaknesses,
and make comparisons between papers the same way.

    The approaches taken by this year's teams can be divided into two general
categories:

Macroscopic: Trafﬁc on a particular highway or segment of highway was con-
   sidered to be a stream, and a ﬂow rate for the stream was characterized.
   Among the successful approaches in this category were ﬂuid dynamics and
   network ﬂow algorithms.

Microscopic: These can be considered car-following models, where the spacing
   between and the speeds of individual vehicles are used to determine the
   ﬂow. Among the successful approaches were discrete event simulations
   (including cellular automata) and queuing systems.

     The UMAP Journal 22 (3) (2000) 337≠343. c Copyright 2001 by COMAP, Inc. All rights reserved.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial
advantage and that copies bear this notice. Abstracting with credit is permitted, but copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than COMAP must be honored. To copy otherwise,
to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior permission from COMAP.
338 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

    By far, the most common approach was to determine that the ﬂow q, or ﬂux,
is a function of the density  of cars on a highway and the average speed v of
those cars: q = v. Successful approaches identiﬁed the following characteris-
tics of the basic trafﬁc ﬂow problem:

∑ When the vehicle density on the highway is 0, the ﬂow is also 0.

∑ As density increases, the ﬂow also increases (up to a point).

∑ When the density reaches its maximum, or jam density 0, the ﬂow must be 0.

∑ Therefore, the ﬂow initially increases, as density does, until it reaches some
   maximum value. Further increase in the density, up to the jam density,
   results in a reduction of the ﬂow.

At this point, many teams either derived from ﬁrst principles or used one of the
many resources available on trafﬁc modeling (such as Garber and Hoel [1999])
to ﬁnd a relationship between the density and the average speed. Three of the
common macroscopic models were:

∑ a linear model developed by Greenshield:

    v = v0    1-         ,        so  q = v0       1-         ;
                   0                                    0

∑ a ﬂuid-ﬂow model developed by Greenberg:

    v  =  v0  log     ,           so  q     =  v0  log     ;
                   0                                    0

or

∑ a higher-order model developed by Jayakrishnan:

    v = v0    1-         a        so  q = v0       1-         a
                   0                                    0
                          ,                                    ,

where v0 represents the speed that a vehicle would travel in the absence of
other trafﬁc (the speed limit). By taking the derivative of the ﬂow equation
with respect to speed (or density), teams then found the optimal speed (or
density) to maximize ﬂow.

    Many teams took the optimal ﬂow from one of the macroscopic approaches
and used it as the basis for a larger model. One of the more common models
was simulation, to determine evacuation times under a variety of scenarios.

    In order to make it beyond the Successful Participant category, teams had
to ﬁnd a way realistically to regulate trafﬁc density to meet these optimality
conditions. Many teams did this by stipulating that ramp metering systems
(long term) or staggered evacuations (short term) could be used to control trafﬁc
density.
                                                                     Judge's Commentary 339

    There were a number of mathematically rigorous papers that started with
a partial differential equation, derived one of the macroscopic formulas, de-
termined appropriate values for the constants, calculated the density giving
the optimal ﬂow, and incorporated this ﬂow value into an algorithm for de-
termining evacuation time. In spite of the impressive mathematics, if no plan
was given to regulate trafﬁc density, the team missed an important concept of
the MCM: the realistic application of a mathematical solution to a real-world
problem.

    One key to successful model building is to adapt existing theory or models
properly to the problem at hand, so judges see little difference between deriv-
ing these equations from ﬁrst principles and researching them from a book.
Whether derived or researched, it is imperative to demonstrate an understand-
ing of the model you are using.

The Judging

    No paper completely analyzed all 6 questions, so the judges were intrigued
by what aspects of the problem that a team found most important and/or
interesting. We were similarly interested in determining what aspects of the
problem a team found least relevant and how they divided their effort among
the remaining questions. To be considered Outstanding, a paper had to meet
several minimum requirements:

∑ the paper must address all 6 questions,

∑ all required elements (e.g., the newspaper article) must be included, and

∑ some sort of validation of the model must be included.

We were also particularly interested in how teams modeled the I-26/I-95 inter-
change and the congestion problem in Columbia. Many teams chose to treat
Columbia as the terminal point of their model and assumed that all cars arriving
there would be absorbed without creating backups.

    To survive the cut between Honorable Mention and Meritorious, a paper
had to have a unique aspect on some portion of the problem. Two examples that
come to mind are a unique modeling approach or some aspect of the problem
analyzed particularly well. Thus, papers that failed to address all questions or
had a fatal weakness that prevented their model from being extended could
still be considered Meritorious. The Meritorious papers typically had very
good insight into the problem, but deﬁciencies as minor as missing parame-
ter descriptions or model implementation details prevented them from being
considered Outstanding.
340 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

The Outstanding Papers

    The six papers selected as Outstanding were recognized as the best of the
submissions because they:

∑ developed a solid model which allowed them to address all six questions,
   and analyze at least one very thoroughly;

∑ made a set of clear recommendations;

∑ analyzed their recommendations within the context of the problem; and

∑ wrote a clear and coherent paper describing the problem, their model, and
   their recommendations.

Here is a brief summary of the highlights of the Outstanding papers.
    The Bethel College team used a basic car-following model to determine an

optimal density, which maximized ﬂow, for individual road segments. They
then formulated a maximum ﬂow problem, with intersections and cities as
vertices and road segments as arcs. The optimal densities were used as arc
capacities, the numbers of vehicles to be evacuated from each city were used
as the sources, and cities at least 50 miles inland were deﬁned to be sinks. Each
city was then assigned an optimal evacuation route, and total evacuation times
under the different scenarios were examined.

    The Duke team also used a basic car-following model from the trafﬁc-
modeling literature. This model provided the foundation of a one-dimensional
cellular automata simulation. They did a particularly good job of deﬁning evac-
uation performance measures--maximum trafﬁc ﬂow and minimum transit
time, and analyzing trafﬁc mergers and bottlenecks--aspects of the problem
ignored by many other teams.

    What discussion of Outstanding papers would be complete without a Har-
vey Mudd team? Of the teams that utilized literature-based models, this team
did the best job of considering advanced parameters--including road grade,
non-ideal drivers, and heavy-vehicle modiﬁcation. They also did a very good
job of comparing their model with the new South Carolina evacuation plan,
recognizing the bottleneck problem in Columbia, and analyzing the impact of
extra drivers from Florida and Georgia on I-95. Their entry was a nice example
of a simple model that was well analyzed and thoroughly explained.

    The Virginia Governor's School team began their analysis by reviewing
the current South Carolina evacuation plan, a baseline to compare their model
against. They researched the literature to ﬁnd trafﬁc-ﬂow equations and then
used a genetic algorithm to assign road orientation and evacuation start times
for cities. They did an exceptionally good job of analyzing the sensitivity of
their model to changes in parameter values.

    The INFORMS prizewinner, from Lawrence Technical University, combined
Greenshield's model with a discrete event simulation. The judges saw this entry
as a solid paper with logical explanations and a good analysis. The team's
                                                                     Judge's Commentary 341

model handled bottlenecks, and the team used a simulation of the actual 1999
evacuation to validate their model.

    The MAA and SIAM winner, from Wake Forest University, derived a car-
following model from ﬁrst principles, which was then incorporated in a cellular
automata type model. Like many of the best approaches, the parameters for
their model came from the 1999 evacuation. They provided a thoughtful, not
necessarily mathematical, analysis of intersections and I-95.

Advice

    At the conclusion of our judging weekend, the judges as a whole offered
the following comments:

Follow the instructions

      ∑ Answer all required parts.
      ∑ Make a precise recommendation.
      ∑ Don't just copy the original problem statement, but provide us with your

        interpretation.

Readability

      ∑ Make it clear in the paper where the answers are.
      ∑ Many judges ﬁnd it helpful to include a table of contents.
      ∑ Pictures and graphs can help demonstrate ideas, results, and conclu-

        sions.
      ∑ Use discretion: If your paper is excessively long (we had a paper this

        year that was over 80 pp, not including computer program listing!),
        you should probably reconsider the relevance of all factors that you are
        discussing. Depending on what round of judging your paper is being
        read, judges typically have between 5 and 30 minutes to read it.

Computer Programs

      ∑ Make sure that all parameters are clearly deﬁned and explained.
      ∑ When using simulation, you must run enough times to have statistically

        signiﬁcant output. A single run isn't enough!
      ∑ Always include pseudocode and/or a clear verbal description.

Reality Check

      ∑ Why do you think your model is good? Against what baseline can you
        compare/validate it?

      ∑ How sensitive is your model to slight changes in the parameters you
        have chosen? (sensitivity analysis)
342 The UMAP Journal 22.3 (2001)

      ∑ Complete the analysis circle: Are your recommendations practical in the
        problem context?

    Before the ﬁnal judging of the MCM papers, a ﬁrst (or triage) round of
judging is held. During triage judging, each paper is skimmed by two or three
judges, who spend between 5 and 10 minutes each reading the paper. Typically,
when you send your paper off to COMAP, you have about a 43% chance of being
ranked higher than Successful Participant. If, however, you survive the triage
round, you have about an 80% chance of being ranked higher than Successful
Participant. Head triage judge Paul Boisen offers the following advice to help
you survive triage.

Triage Judge Tips

      ∑ Your summary is a key component of the paper; it needs to be clear
        and contain results. A long list of techniques can obscure your results;
        it is better to provide only a quick overview of your approach. The
        Lawrence Technical University paper is a good example of a clear and
        concise summary.

      ∑ Your paper needs to be well organized--can a triage judge understand
        the signiﬁcance of your paper in 6 to 10 minutes?

Triage Judge Pet Peeves

      ∑ Tables with columns headed by Greek letters or acronyms that cannot
        be immediately understood.

      ∑ Deﬁnitions and notation buried in the middle of paragraphs of text. A
        bullet form is easier for the frantic triage judge!

      ∑ Equations without variables deﬁned.
      ∑ Elaborate derivations of formulas taken directly from a text. It is better to

        cite the book and perhaps brieﬂy explain how the formula is derived. It
        is most important to demonstrate that you know how to use the formulas
        properly.

Reference

Garber, Nicholas J., and Lester A. Hoel. 1999. Trafﬁc and Highway Engineering.
    Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
                                                                     Judge's Commentary 343

About the Author

    After receiving his B.A. in Mathematics and Computer Science in 1984, Mark
Parker spent eight years working as a systems simulation and analysis engineer
in the defense industry. After completing his Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics at
the University of Colorado≠Denver in 1995, he taught mathematics and com-
puter science at Eastern Oregon University for two years. He then spent three
years on the faculty at the U.S. Air Force Academy teaching mathematics and
operations research courses. He now shares a teaching position with his wife,
Holly Zullo, at Carroll College in Helena, MT, and spends as much time as he
can with his three-year-old daughter Kira.
